Dialogue and questions, so in your hands.
Well, that's good. Really. I thought you might come up
to Auckland just once in a blue moon, but,
Oh, you know, look, you know, I've been there more than
you've been to Wellington, Wayne.
Well, it's possibly true, but I'm not submitting
on anything in Wellington.
You are here,
but nevertheless, the digital version is quite good for me.
Anyhow, um, I've got the Chair
of Council's transport committee, who's this gentleman here
and beside me, Andrew Baker, and a couple of
Congratulations. Thank
Your honor.
Uh, and I'd like to congratulate the government
for getting this bill into the house And
the opposition parties
for supporting it through its first read.
So please get on with it. And we know how to find that.
We have to wait for several years, like the,
um, time of use charging.
This is urgent. It'll all help you at the next election from
whichever side you are from.
Auckland is overwhelmingly want to see a change in the way
that the transport operates in Auckland.
It's overwhelming. The biggest issue raised with me
by the public when I'm out and about.
And probably the same for your Auckland mps as well.
My plan to fix Auckland Transport
carried me to a large victory.
Some of the issues come
through a longstanding underinvestment and infrastructure
and lack of proper public transport over this,
but we're getting on top of that
with big projects like City Rail Link.
And I thank all parties for their support
and getting that project close to the finish line.
However, Auckland has remained fed up with the small issues
and the decisions that are made
by Auckland Transport on a day-to-day basis
for things that are around them.
Auckland Transport operate, operates very differently
to any other council transport department in New Zealand
as a statutory independent
that operates an arms length from the council.
I've tried every lever at my disposal to get 'em
to follow council direction, but haven't made much progress.
The only real power I have is to send them stern letters,
which are mostly ignored
or never get down to the people doing the work
or the consultants that they use
instead of doing it themselves.
The independence leads to Democratic deficit
and transport decision making that is at the heart
of many issues we see in transport here today.
Every day, even the streets right outside my office,
Victoria and Willis Street, we've examples of
how the current system is broken.
There's no joined up thinking and no political oversight,
and it results in stupid things that annoy everyone.
I've taken our senior people
and their senior people just the two intersections
around here, and we've pointed out that every single thing
that they have done is wrong.
And my, our leaders up here in the council suddenly
woken up that fact as well.
The bill fixes this issue of independence
by focusing it on the delivery of public transport service
services, which is not bad at leaving council
how transport should function in a, it's nothing radical.
It's exactly how transport operates in every other council
in New Zealand, the public understand things pretty well.
Public trans, um, satisfaction
rates are high for public transport side of it
up in the eighties and nineties,
but they're down in the twenties for everything else
that at does.
So the structure and the bill lines up well
with the problems that we see and the public.
The bill also sets up a new structure for collaboration
between council and central government.
And for the first time, we'll have an integrated 30 year
transport plan for the region.
But that does mean integrating.
That means that the government will have to understand
that we will be part of that.
I've been very frustrated by the approach of success
of governments to transport in Auckland.
Both government have announced projects costing tens
of billion dollars without taking talking to us.
The labor ended into trouble
because the projects were poorly thought out,
development secret and cost more.
And so we never even started them,
and the parties ended up embarrassing themselves.
But same with this lot.
There's no, we want no more secret harbor crossings,
or I had my very first briefing
about the harbor crossing yesterday, my very first briefing,
which was deeply embarrassing to the people who presented
to me because it wasn't well thought through.
Meanwhile, Auckland have been left disillusioned by promises
of long-term transport projects that never eventuate.
The small projects that actually fix problems are ignored.
The approaches must change.
And this is why I've been pushing
for an integrated 30 year plan
and a joint council government committee.
It'll be good New plan
and regional transport committee should minimize political
squabbling and set up the long term processes.
The 30 year plan will be based on logical assessment
of the movement of goods and people,
and not on the reelection of mps.
NZTA will have to get used to being us being involved.
I should caution though that the legislation
around transport and local government is very complicated.
Our legal and government sub teams have been
through in a high level of detail.
They found some areas where provisions
of the bill have hardwired in legislation
that might make things too bureaucratic.
Willington has a tendency to over be,
be overly prescriptive in legislation.
This may look great to you,
but it often leads to provisions that are unworkable
or add paperwork for the sake of it.
I don't wanna be back in a year's time asking
for urgent legislative fix
because we've found transport projects are struggling
to get built because some clever lawyer finds a criminal
and wants the ACT's enforce.
One area we're concerned about is the delegation
of powers to local boards.
Keep in mind, we have 21 local boards.
Most of them are populations bigger than parts
of the HU Valley.
I want communities to be able
to make decisions over local streets.
They're the ones using them every day,
but we don't need to spell out pri
and primary law exactly what powers full council has
and what powers local boards have.
We're the experts in Auckland, so allow us the ability
to delegate powers appropriately,
just like Christchurch does with its community.
Boards will be accountable for that.
The bill also says that every single local board has
to agree to a bylaw, and that's just ridiculous.
That power should sit with a governing body
and the board should be consulted
and not have veto powers under that rule.
The local board at great barrier could have a veto
power on things in the city.
We wouldn't give each dis, you wouldn't give each district
or city council the power to veto laws
that you pass, for example.
I also think there is a bit
of government overreach in a few places.
The bill requires ministerial approval for several matters,
such as delegation to the transport CCO,
and the Road classification network.
Now, I know ministers love giving themselves extra power,
but we should ask us if this is really necessary.
Ministers have better things to do than
to prove if the bullet track should be controlled
by the governing body or by the local board.
On our pass on to our staff team leading the transport
reform, including some, um,
it says excellent lawyers, but I think they're quite good.
Might be a better description from council.
I'm not normally mad about lawyers or bureaucrats,
but this team are knowledgeable,
so I recommend that you listen to them.
And I'll also pass over to my chief executive, Phil Winston,
who will probably Phil Wilson, who will repeat
what I've said, but in sort of bureaucrat.
So I hope you're in fluent in that.
But that's the blood version basically. It's good.
Basically, we like separating out
and leaving behind public transport,
which they're not bad at.
And basically, we really wanna get on with the risk
of things and make as many decisions as we can ourselves
and trust the fact some of us know quite a lot about things.
I know a lot about roading.
I know nothing about choreography,
but I know a lot abouting.
Trust us. Right? Thank you.
Thank you, Wayne. You've choreographed that very well.
All the same. Right?
Let's do some other intros as well there.
So, uh, and, um, so we we'll hear from the officials.
Cool. Please step forward into the law,
into the central position.
Um, and, uh, good morning everyone.
Um, I'll try and limit the, uh, bureaucrat.
Was that the word? Uh, mayor Wayne?
Um, I don't think I'm, Um,
and, um, just to, just to note, I'm joined, um,
on my left, your right.
Um, uh, Megan Tyler, who's, uh,
um, our executive team.
Morning. Um, look, I won't repeat the mayor.
Um, um, what the mayor said too much, um, just
to acknowledge I'm the I am Council's chief executive
and, and
therefore have a pretty vital interest in this reform
in the sense that it creates a new CCO
that we've got a key relationship with.
Um, but importantly, um, a quite significant chunk of
transport activity envisaged.
If we, if we just presume for a moment
that the default position in the legislation holds, then,
uh, you've got quite a significant function coming into, uh,
into my organization.
So, um, um, just starting at a high level,
as the mere says, um, we broadly welcome the change
and the opportunity for a reset.
Um, um, and,
and for the reasons that are articulated in the,
in the forward to the legislation
in which we ourselves have, um, advocated for, for a period
of time in terms of strength
and democratic accountability, a level
of local determination around certain, uh, um,
transport matters with a bit of,
and Megan will talk to this with a bit of caution
because of course, the transport system needs to operate,
um, effectively regionally as a network
to a significant degree as well.
So we need this, we need this complementarity
between the local decision making and boards
and what exists, um, regionally, we don't think
that's totally right in the way
that it's framed in the legislation.
Um, but a bit of, bit of a few tweaks will, will help, um,
at a more strategic level.
Um, you know, I I want to endorse two things really.
Um, the importance of integrating transport planning,
you know, with our other land use and growth
and capital infrastructure, um, planning, um, that's,
that's vital in order that, um, the city develops in a,
in a coherent and integrated manner
because we cannot think about, um,
transport investments separate from land use
and separate from other infrastructure investments, water
and wastewater in particular.
So it's a statement perhaps of the bleeding obvious.
Um, but the advent of the, um,
control over the destiny of transport in the region for
that reason alone is, is quite vital.
Um, I think that the second thing is to acknowledge the,
um, at a governance level, the notion of, um,
council and the crown being parties
to the regional transport committee
and that high level decision making for the region,
um, is, is welcome.
You know, we are both, broadly speaking,
equal funding partners in, in this journey,
and it, it holds
therefore that, um, joint input to some of
that high level decision making is good for the future.
There are some who have criticized council
for surrendering, a little bit
of sovereignty in that regard.
Um, but, um, we don't particularly see it that way.
We see it as an opportunity actually for council
and the Crown to be joined up, um, for there
to be a more durable transport plan for Auckland that, um,
if you like, better survives political cycles, um,
and, and clarifies
and really aligns priorities going forward that, um,
to my mind is, um, closer to Nirvana
and the transport space, um, given the,
its critical importance to the way that Auckland, uh,
develops and functions as a city.
Um, so, so we welcome those measures.
There are a number of things that we are suggesting, um,
through the submission,
and I'm just gonna ask Megan to, um, speak to some
of those more specific items.
And then I'm gonna come back, um, myself
and just talk a little bit to some
of the transition provisions.
Um, you know, um, it doesn't escape me that, um,
um, I,
we have a particular responsibility from an employment, uh,
perspective here.
Um, and we've gotta have a really, um,
positive experience of transitioning to these new,
uh, arrangements.
And I've personally got a legal
responsibility in that regard.
So I'd like to return to that, but only
after me, Megan has spoken to a couple of the specifics.
Uh, thanks. Uh, thank you Chair, foster. Thank you, Phil.
Thank you. And, uh, Morina. Coto. Good morning. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, I'll just, uh, go
through a few of the details briefly.
The mayor has, has kind of referenced some of them, uh,
but just to be clear, the reason that we are raising this is
to make this workable.
So it's important for both, uh, you as government, uh,
and us as Auckland Council,
that these provisions are workable.
And that's, uh, the reason and,
and where we've come from, um, in making our submission.
Firstly, in terms of the transport, CCO, um,
obviously the bill is, uh, drafted that, uh,
it is a, a statutory CCO that will have public transport,
um, uh, functionality.
Our position here is
that we've consistently said the government doesn't have
to force Auckland Council to, um, to go into a CCO.
Uh, we can make that decision ourselves.
Uh, and so we should really be enabled under existing local
government provisions, local government act provisions
to make that decision as opposed
to it being statutorily required for us.
Um, the mayor has said,
and we have consistently said what we do, agree
that a CCO model will be, um, the right model
for public transport functions, but
nonetheless, that doesn't have to be statutorily required.
Um, you know, we can make that decision ourselves a,
a particular point, and if there are questions we can take
those later, um, that we have requested
that if it does re is retained as a statutory CCO,
then we do request that the bill enables that CCO
to be a company under the company's act.
What that does is it allows us as shareholder to, um,
have more leverage and levers
and controls, for example, like, um,
issuing binding directions, um,
or having approval rights for major financial transactions.
You've also heard, um,
there are various places in the legislation, um,
where the ministerial approval is required, um,
for delegation of functions.
So where council might be delegating functions to that, uh,
public transport, CCO,
it also requires ministerial approval.
Um, again, Auckland Council should be able to determine, uh,
want it, what, what it wants
to delegate within the direction, um,
that has been set by the legislation.
Um, also, there will be times we know that there will need
to be quick decisions made around delegations,
and having additional approvals
will create unnecessary time, um, delays
and probably resource delays as well.
In terms of decision making, you've heard us talk about the,
and the mayor has raised, uh, the, the issue
of governing body and local boards, the split.
Um, and while we are very clear
that we support greater local decision making in transport,
um, we do not support the provisions that prescribe
that allocation, um, of,
of responsibilities to local boards.
Uh, it is, uh, we are concerned that it is too prescriptive.
It doesn't, it doesn't allow any flexibility as
that starts working out on the ground.
Uh, and, and as the mayor said,
once you put something in primary legislation, uh,
it's almost impossible to change even if there are, um,
unintended consequences.
So we believe that it is at the moment, as, as drafted,
unworkable in practice, uh,
and overcomplicates, uh, the decision making.
We gave an example in our submission, um, of roading,
for example, around Eden Park.
And of course, Eden Park also has a rail, uh,
station right next to it too.
So you could add that in. You'll have roads
that are arterial, so that might be in governing body,
and you'll have local roads, um, particularly straight
around Eden Park.
And how we can get a, an integrated, um, uh,
view and network view, for example,
around Eden Park is an example
of unnecessarily complicated decision making, um,
that would occur as the legislation is currently drafted.
So, while, so what we are saying is,
rather than having statutory, um, allocation of powers
that the council should use,
its existing powers under local government act to do
that work, uh,
and to be able to work that, um,
in the most appropriate way.
There's also a bit about bylaws.
Again, the mayor raised this at the moment.
Uh, it requires, um, that, uh, all local boards agree
to a, to a bylaw.
That's 21. Um, in our world, uh, again,
that's just not workable.
We have tried and tested provisions
of having local board input, direct input into all bylaw,
um, proposals and, and decisions,
but the decision is made by the governing body that works.
We think it should just remain, um, uh, under that tried
and true, um, method of, of, of developing bylaws.
The roading classification framework, again,
we do support having a roading classification framework.
We have one already. We know NCTA has one
that that's standard.
The concern we have here is that in the legislation,
the framework itself is being used to then
allocate these decision making, these decisions to
between governing body and local boards.
We don't think that is the right use of it, and
therefore we are, um, concerned, um, at
that, at that provision.
Uh, we have no concerns with having a framework,
but not for it to be used for that purpose.
Um, there's also a requirement for the minister
to approve that framework as well.
And again, that seems, um, unnecessary to us.
And just my last point before I, um, uh, to back to Phil
to talk a little bit more about
some of the employment matters.
So just in terms of the transitional provisions, uh,
we are proposing or suggesting for the interim CCO board,
so the one that will occur on Royal Ascent, um,
we propose a five member limit as opposed to the three.
There is substantial work to be done.
And when we look at the existing, uh,
Auckland Transport Board and the numbers on that,
we just think threes are too few.
So we would propose, um, up to five, um,
on that interim board.
We do support the review of the current policies
and plans, uh, around transport.
Uh, but again, what we are saying here is that we should,
uh, Orland council should be enabled
to determine which ones we review at over what timeframe.
Uh, and we're also, um, very supportive of the inclusion
of a transition plan in the bill.
Um, but we are proposing, um,
and suggesting that in fact, the chief executive approves
that plan as opposed to our governors.
That is the transition plan is a management plan
effectively, of how the organization will work to implement
the, the, the, the law and the transition.
And so we think the chief executive should have sign
off, um, of that plan.
If you're okay, Mr. Chair, I'll just pass to Phil to, um,
put his concluding remarks in.
Thanks. That'd be great.
And then we'll go to questions. Thank you.
Yeah, so, um, just to comment on the transition
and employment provisions.
Um, there's clearly a lot riding
on the transition being managed well,
and, uh, we are supportive of the provision that allows
for six months following Royal Ascent.
Um, um, to be blunt, we will try
and accelerate, um, the transition a bit.
Um, the consequence of that in the round is
that people within the Auckland Transport
and Auckland Council environment are, are kept in a state
of, uh, uncertainty to a degree
for upwards of 12 months.
Um, so while the legislation's fine in that, it, it, um,
sets out an, um, a, a timeframe,
six months following Royals Royal Ascent to have this done.
Uh, we want to move a little bit faster,
and I can tell the select committee that the planning
around this has already well
and truly began, uh, begun, um, in a collaborative fashion
with, um, Auckland Transport itself.
Um, that includes the functional design
for the public transport CCO entity.
And the way that arrangements will happen within council.
I think you'll understand from an employment
or an employer perspective, um,
that there's a certain wisdom in moving quickly
and not leaving people in limbo for too long.
So, while we support the six month timeframe,
I'm letting you know that we're, um, moving
a bit faster than that, um, than the, um,
the objective, of course is to create sort
of two high performing organizations.
There'll be a public transport, CCO with, with, we think,
something in the region of 300 to 350 staff.
Um, meaning that there are about 14
to 1500 Auckland Transport staff
who would come across into the council organization.
What we wanted to be clear with you on is that, um,
in, and, and we've talked to this in the submission, we,
we are well practiced at this type of thing.
There is well established employment law, both,
both common law and other, uh, other, um, precedents, um,
and, and elsewhere in the legal framework
for how this is handled.
Um, the, this transport legislation
uses slightly different language
and some slightly different, um, notions around that, um,
equivalency of role, um, uh, comes to mind.
I won't dig into this too much.
Our encouragement is that we rely on the existing,
uh, framework that already exists for this type
of change in organizations, not try
and, uh, invent something bespoke, um, uh,
for, for this situation.
That's, that's kind of a key, a key message.
Um, um,
I think I'll, I think I'll leave it there rather than, um,
get into a slightly arcane discussion about the Employment
Law Pro provisions.
But we would welcome opportunity if, if, uh, we need to, to,
to clarify, uh, this point
because it's, it, it's quite important for how the,
how the transition would happen.
Um, one thing I would say is that, um,
we, we want to preserve employment wherever possible down
through the, uh, transport structures.
Um, the mayor will talk to, I'm sure.
Um, and,
and I agree there's an opportunity here for a bit of a reset
and some important change in culture with, um, with, um,
with this change.
So, no, no argument there.
But we've gotta balance this between, um, the change
that we need and the way
that transport operates in Auckland,
and the need for, uh, preserving, um, some of the key talent
that exists at an operational level within,
within transport.
So we've got a view of how that might best operate.
And, uh, it's reflected in, in this, in the submission.
Um, I think one thing I forgot to do,
but I'll just wrap up with it, is just I did want to sort
of in this environment, think the, uh, ministry
of Transport staff who have worked with us, um, up till now,
and frankly also the ministers and,
and other, um, um, uh, uh, politicians
who have been party to all of the work up to this point.
It's been very collaborative
and, uh, welcome in its approach.
So, um, I'll just go on record as, um, thanking folk for,
for that we can, uh,
questions. Questions. Yeah. Yeah.
Cool. Look, thank you very much. Um, all of you.
Um, so just before, uh, going to questions I've got,
I'll take Tony and then Dan.
But, um, just in terms of ongoing work, um, there's been,
you've requested to be advisors.
We've had some discussion,
a little bit of discussion about that.
Uh, we haven't sort of, um, got anywhere with that,
but I do know that we will need to keep on the conversation.
One conversation is not gonna finish, uh, all the,
I suspect we will want to, um, discuss with you.
So if you're open to whatever way we do that, uh, having
that further engagement will be very useful.
Oh, very, very open to it.
Um, would, would absolutely welcome the opportunity to kind
of, um, keep supporting this process.
Good. No, thank you very much. Um, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Mayor, Phil
and the rest of the Auckland team.
Um, Phil, just picking up on your last point,
but I think it would be quite helpful to get a little bit
more info from you
around the transitional provisions
in relation to employment.
'cause I think what's really important here is
that there is the, the need for efficiency,
operational efficiency,
but also a level of fairness around that.
So, pleased to hear you, um, talk about that.
Can I just pick up on the, um, comments
that you've made today,
but also in your submission around the role of local boards.
Um, what I'm hearing from you is that you'd like
to see perhaps a little bit more of a streamlined process in
that the governing body will be able to make a lot
of those decisions in consultation with the local boards.
That clearly happens for you at the moment.
Can you just explain to the committee how that works?
Like how you would see that in terms of,
if it's called consultation, uh, do you see that as the, um,
members of the governing body who are from
that particular area,
being the conduit alongside the local board?
Just talk us through how,
how you see mitigating that as a concern.
Yeah, thank you. Um, to, to that last point, not, not
so much a conduit.
They, they, they're are, you know, aligned
but reasonably distinct roles
between the regional governance, um, of Auckland
represented in the governing body and,
and the decision making locally.
I think the point that Megan was making earlier is that, um,
through the specific Auckland local government legislation,
there are approaches that are well tried and tested.
Um, we have an allocation
and a delegation, uh, uh, apparatus here.
Um, and it's through those instruments that we can clarify
the, the scope of local board, um, decision making.
And I, and I know we are overstating this perhaps,
but you know, to be really clear, we are supportive
of a level of local decision making, local determination
around certain transport projects, um,
and certain other decision makings in any in the area.
We just, we, it, it, we get into big trouble when we try
and prescribe, um, early exactly what
that demarcation of responsibility looks like.
So we think it's far safer to leave it to us to determine
that on, on the ground quite simply.
Um, we do, when we are allocating decision making
to local boards, it's quite a formal process that's handled
through the long term plan and requires public consultation.
So there's good safeguards in this, um,
that protect the interests locally, um, to,
to decision making.
Um, but honestly, um,
my experience having worked in this environment
for 15 years is that we are best to leave it to us to, to,
uh, work that problem locally.
Thank you. And just one other question is, uh, again,
just some clarity around the ministerial approval that, uh,
the bill would require for effectively Auckland Council
to carry out the delegations.
What, what you're saying there is that make sure
that the delegations are specified in,
in the primary legislation and this bill,
and then basically leave it to you guys to just get on
and be able to do that.
That's basically what you're saying.
Uh, yes, we are. So, um, with the primary legislation set,
the clear direction or expectations,
but the way that that occurs, um, you can leave that
to us. That's, yep.
Thanks, Dan.
Hey, thanks, Mr. Chair, your worship, uh, welcome, uh,
councilor and, uh, to Phil and Megan, uh, your worship.
Congratulations on your reelection
and your, um, thumping majority.
Um, and, um,
and for your advocacy in this area, I know that you
and I have talked for, uh, many months around this,
and you've campaigned openly on this, so congratulations
for your work getting this bill to this stage.
Um, I just wanna reflect on,
I saw a campaign video actually, uh, during the campaign
around you talking about the, you write your letters
and, uh, to Auckland Transport,
and there's not much you else you can do.
I, I'm really keen to just get your sense of
does this bill give you confidence that, um, the changes
that we are making will give you as mayor
and council collectively more, more
control over the delivery of transport.
I know it's being set up, uh, as an
independent organization,
but I'm keen to get your sense
of whether this addresses your concerns about the lack of,
um, responsiveness from Auckland Transport
around the delivery, whether it's, you know,
lifting your service expectations, getting rid of cones,
getting projects done.
Do, do you feel confident that this bill as drafted, gives,
um, gives that level of accountability
and responsiveness back?
Okay, very good question. Thank you.
Uh, member bid, um,
it's a great step forward.
Uh, I think the public, as I've said
before, are wiser than given, um,
than people think that the, the delivery
of public transport's going reasonably well in Auckland.
Um, and the people involved in in that sector of it seem
to be quite competent.
They, I've got a little picture I'll show you up here,
which has got a whole lot of little blue things on it
and black bits and pieces,
and those are what we've determined to be the management,
um, system in there.
Um, in this 56, I think of them, um,
and growing, uh, growing,
the chief executive has been unable to answer to me, um,
how the decisions are made.
So we go out onto a site just,
and we sent a letter to the board saying, I wanted
to improve east west traffic flows through the city,
and there's really only about four
roads that are affected by that.
That's Custom Street, um, Victoria Street,
Wellesley Street, and Merrill Drive.
And, um, and so there, there was a clear instruction,
the net result, what, what's actually happened is the,
the way they're set up there is not
around the tasks that they carry out.
It's a skills. So a group of people
of skills have been lined up together
and net result to do anything.
They have. So many people have something say in it
that the original letter from us saying improve
East West gets lost.
And then they hand it over to consultants as well,
which is another thing I don't like, like we have it built,
it's built around a thing that they call SMEs, which I used
to think the small and medium enterprises,
which has now become, um, in their book,
it means subject, subject matter experts,
really small minded employees actually.
Um, so you have have about 10 people to decide anything,
so no one's ever responsible.
Mm-hmm. So we've looked out the road
and they've just done something really stupid out.
I'm just fixing on two
or three big intersections right outside my office.
And, and I use that as a way of,
if we can fix those, it'll fix everywhere.
Not that I'm gonna go around fixing everything there,
but we sign what are, these are the things
that are wrong here, how did they happen?
And so just a simple thing like removing a line of traffic,
which, you know, was plenty of room for three, we went down
to two, and then they put an arrow on there that meant
that no one could get through east West.
Mm-hmm. And we think, well, out of these 56 people
who do you ask to change that arrow?
Yeah. And it's like Russia, I know where it is,
but I dunno who to call.
And, um, and so we are, we are now working out
what are the actual tasks that will be carried out
and build the new way
around the tasks rather than around the skills.
And so, and it's, my experience as a designer,
builder, owner and seller of roads is that generalists
are better than, than than subject matter experts.
Somebody should be able to say,
if I'm gonna give you two kilometers of Rimu a road
or two kilometers of Lake Road, can you organize this?
So it's all sensible, but we don't get that
because everybody has a little thing,
and they have a guy just to put a, um,
a bus stop in place at the moment.
There's a small, uh, subject matter expert.
I keep saying small minded idiots,
but, um, so about the actual bus shelter,
and another one about Cycleway,
and another one about the curb,
and another one at the footpath, another one about the road.
The net result of that is instead of having the, um,
bus shelter, which is where people sit out of the rain,
to catch a bus right beside where the buses, the people have
to fight their way across two cycleways a footpath, a bit
of planting, and then get onto a bus
drowning with that stage.
And that sort of stuff is happening at the moment
because of the way that they do it.
And so these people, I'm not,
and Andy is more defensive of the people
inside there than I, because he spent more time amongst them
and has spent less time building roads than I have.
But we will balance the tensions amongst ourselves.
But what I wanna do, what I,
someone said, what does good look like?
Good look like, good, looks like the public at walked
and feeling comfortable about all the things that we do
for them, instead of feeling enormously p****d off
because things can get through the system
that they've got there now, and they go and do it, and then,
and a whole conflagration erupts
where everyone rings the mayor, it's my fault.
And so we want this to be set up.
So what are, because I have experience
with other councils beforehand, you set up
what are the tasks you're doing,
the major tasks you're doing other than delivering public
transport, is delivering effective roads that are available
for all forms of use.
And, and you don't, that this doesn't happen
by having someone who's in charge of cycleways, having
to compete with someone in charge of cars, this having
to compete with someone in charge of buses.
If someone looks as that, here's the route,
this is an important route or not an important route.
And, and coming back to some of the other things that were,
that Megan was going on about where we need
to make some decisions, if, for instance, you'd define, um,
an, uh, a regional road and a national road
and a local road, we do that to, we understand generally
what that is, but it would be quite easy for Queen Street
to be listed as a local road where in fact,
it's a nationally significant road.
And so getting into too much detail at the, at,
at the writing of the legislation will lead to all sorts
of things like that are nuts.
And, um, we, one of the good things about this is
that in the legislation, it allows the CBD
to not be responsible just to the local board
because of we got, we've got now good.
But that's the sort of stuff that I'm saying is good.
Yeah, no, no, thanks. Thank you. Overall,
Will it make it better, Dan?
I think it will definitely make it better,
but we still have to get it right ourselves.
Great. Thank you. Thank you, mayor.
Thank you. Juliet. Kiara,
mayor Brown, uh, councilor Baker.
Um, Phil, Megan, thanks so much for your submission.
Um, have definitely taken on board your suggestions about,
um, things that need to change.
Um, I did wanna ask you about the
Auckland Regional Transport Committee
and the way that that is going to be appointed
by the Minister of the day, um, and the council
and having equal representation from a
minister and the council.
And, um, I guess I'm thinking if this is a long-term
planning project that they need to undertake, um,
do you think it would be useful if there was more
representation that's locally elected
or locally appointed as opposed to the minister
and the government of the day?
And just your thoughts on whether it would be useful if the
government appointments reflected more than just the
minister and the government of the day?
Because we do know governments change,
and I think all of us want to see
good long-term planning
that's gonna benefit Auckland and the country.
Um, and there is some risk, I guess, um, with so much power,
50% of the voting members on the committee being appointed
by one person in the government of the day.
Just before you answer that,
can I just add also at the moment, the, it's not the council
that appoints, it's the mayor that appoints
and, uh, um, just interested in your, I we understand
that you, um, would consult with your council,
but just the process that you go through, uh, to appoint
your side, because at the moment,
to follow Julianne's question, we have two,
two individual human beings, in theory, the minister
and the mayor who are appointing everybody.
Um, and whether that's as, whether that's optimal.
Okay, thank you for that question. Uh, Ms.
Jen, um, I, it, it could be seen
as we've given up something, but I think we've gained a lot.
What that will mean is that when we do a 30 year plan,
the government will have to be fully aware of it.
And when they come up with some, um,
we have suffered from sort of the brilliant central idea.
Um, the, the labor government had the idea
of light rail, which in itself wasn't a bad idea,
but the way it got rammed down our throat without any input,
net result was nothing happened.
And it almost became a bad word like rail,
but in fact, it isn't a bad solution at certain times.
Um, we can't, for, for yesterday
to be the very first time I've been told about,
about the Harbor crossing, um, shows
how woeful the system is at the moment.
We won't, with what we've got here.
And the mayor and the,
and the, um, minister appointing is the correct way.
They're both the people who are democratically elected
to head the whole discussions on that field.
And we both put it together.
And what,
what happens when we had the discussion yesterday about the
harbor crossing became abundantly clear that they,
that the people working on it had an
unbelievably narrow focus.
They were just solving the repairs to the bridge.
Um, there was no understanding of the fact that
in over a 30 year period, instead of worrying about the, the
Alaska melting, um, the port probably will won't be here
by then, which will have a huge change
on what goes over the bridge.
Um, the, we are, um, launching into
PC one plan change one 20,
which will intensify certain areas of orchid,
which are sensibly built around transport, um,
service provision.
And that in itself, o over a period will alter the demand
of, of who goes over over, um, ha harbor board.
So a, a decision over there has to be far wider
than just the repairs
to the trusses on the existing Harbor Bridge.
And so, um, the,
the joint membership of that will force both sides to have
to listen to each other in a manner that we've got.
We've got, there's been periodic announcements of roads
of national significance without any understanding
that they're actually local roads here.
And, uh, uh, and so instead of having a situation
where we do the road from, um, poo ho
to walk with
and spend enough money to gone all the way to re
and end up with me being crooked hounding at everybody about
it, we would've had a say in there at the start,
it is a local road.
It doesn't even get you outside Auckland.
And there blew billions
of dollars when a lot less money would've,
was all it was required.
So I think having them together at that level is very good.
Uh, um, thank you. Um,
Could I Yeah, go.
Thank you so much, mayor Brown,
and you'd be amazed how much I absolutely agree
with you and many of your comments.
Um, I guess what I'm wondering is, you know,
for the Representation Commission, which looks at boundaries
of electorates, um, there's an opposition nominee as well
as a government nominee to the committee.
And I just wonder if it would be useful
for opposition parties to be able to have some input,
as they might well be in government, um, at some point,
and definitely will be at some point during the 30 year.
So having some more cross party consensus, uh,
to represent Parliament as opposed
to just the government of the day.
Do you think that could be useful?
Well, that's really for you guys
to decide that side of it.
Um, on my side of it, my, I run a council, which is, um,
for which both the ma all major parties
are present in my council.
Um, and I'm probably the least
party orientated person of them by miles,
but we learn to work and,
and hear, um, each other's viewpoint.
And, um, that might be how a, a model for
how you guys work in to assume, uh, who
represents you there.
I mean, we are speaking to you right now,
and there's a range of political views on the other side,
and I certainly have to represent a range
of political views in order to get anything done.
But it, it is, I found it, it's not frustrating.
It's actually quite educating really, uh, both way.
It goes both ways. You know, that in, in that kind
of loose way we have, people aren't quite so rigid about,
um, whether they're blue or red or green or black
or whatever the colors are.
I didn't mean that personally.
Thank you. Good morning.
Um, thank you for, for, for putting a submission in.
My question is also on the Auckland Regional
Transport Committee as well.
Um, obviously we got free Auckland Council elected member
will be in the committee do,
because every three years there's a local vote election
and there will be a change of council will be easier.
We follow the first step of Auckland Future Fund,
rather than putting elected members there.
We elected, uh, council can appoint free, uh,
independent, uh, professional
or specialist in the board rather than elected member.
What's your voice or view on,
So Mr of all, thank you for, um,
the work you've done on the Auckland Future
Fund legislation.
That's good. Um, no, which should be elected officials.
We got the mess that we got
because we appointed independent boards, um,
of supposed experts, uh, to Auckland Transport,
and the net result is what we've got.
Nobody likes it. So, uh, the thing is that, um, by
the, the people that we will be appointing to that, um,
border, uh, three, um, nominees,
all the councilor Baker beside me, councilor Williamson
and Councilor Henderson,
and it's important that they're elected people because,
and of those, they, they're not all the same party and,
and they're all the same gender,
but that's just one of those facts of life.
Um, the, they are elected
and they're forced to listen to their people.
And the problem with the appointed councils, uh, with you,
when you, I'm I, you know,
for a person who's chaired a lot of big companies,
I've got no faith in the Institute
of Director's appointment systems.
What you get is people who are very good at getting on
to boards, but not particularly good at
doing anything when they get on there.
And we have some very poor results as a result of that.
So I like it the way it is. Thank you very much.
But thanks again for the work you've done with this.
I mean, the, the, um,
future fund is a very narrow based item.
It's particularly narrow skillset required
all the public want out of that is a good result,
a good positive result.
The, the, um, transport
reflects a hugely wide interaction.
There are people who get p****d off
because the bus seats are in the wrong place.
There are people who get upset
because they've got stupid, um, uh, speed bumps
where in fact it's far cheaper just to narrow the road down.
And basically, I'm annoyed
because we don't have any standard results for anything.
So the very first thing
that we're gonna be doing is a review of standards, review
of standards of transport,
which are different from the standards
of the councils for subdivisions.
And so when I want to standardize everything or other,
and having three people there, who are the sorts of people
who will be rung by somebody who's
annoyed by something that they do.
So that brings back that very lack
of democratic, um, principle.
I don't want to be receiving every letter from everyone
who's p****d off, which is what I get at the moment.
It's, we want to reduce the number of letters
and have them go to people who can,
who have some responsibility for it.
So Mr. Baker will start receiving some of my letters
and be, be a learning procedure for which you won't enjoy,
but he's it. Love it.
But thank you. We've got about 10 minutes left.
Um, colleagues, are there other, other questions, uh, people
At this stage, Um, you, you've mentioned in your, um,
submission around more flexibility
around future models rather than the CCO.
And I'm just, I, I know that's in the distant future,
but, um, I mean, what, you know, respect the flexibility
that you wish to have.
I'm just wondering what, what alternatives were you,
were you hoping are on the table
for future councils to consider?
Is that, is that really about bringing the CCO within the
council as a department?
Um, you know, just give us a flavor of that.
Thank you. Member beis. Uh, look, I think
that it is all part of that, um, broader, um,
conversation we've been having
around the prescriptive nature of legislation.
And if it requires a certain thing,
if anything changes into the future, um,
you are pretty much, it's very unlikely you can ever change
to a better future or,
or a better response without prep, for example,
in this case would be changing in, in legislation, um,
to remove that requirement.
So, um, apart from the company's act, uh, issue, which
as I said, provides as a shareholder a greater range
of levers for council to, to require the, um,
uh, the, the public transport entity, uh, you know,
as I said, for example, to have some approvals
of major financial transactions, um, we weren't, uh,
pointing to anything in particular.
It was just an example of if and when,
because the fact is things will change in the future
by prescribing it in legislation.
Um, as a CCO will mean we'll have to come back
for another change in legislation.
Understood. Thank you.
If, if I might, the, um, it's really speaking
to the principal position that, um,
Auckland Council's big enough
and ugly enough to determine its own future in terms of,
uh, its arrangements.
Um, any other council in the country
determines whether it wishes some of its activities,
be it public transport, be it whatever, um,
to exist in a CCO environment or not.
Um, yet in this situation, it's being prescribed.
Now, we're not in disagreement about the merits of
CCOs generally in some situations, or,
or even, uh, in this public transport realm.
It's the principled position that, um, um,
Auckland could be respected here
to make its own decisions about its delivery arrangements
and whether a CCO is formed or not.
So would you like the committee to consider, um,
an amendment that is probably akin to what,
what we had in the legislation and for the other CCOs?
So for Kentucky Unlimited
or, um, I think there was other CCOs where, you know,
basically Auckland Council had the ability to change.
Is that what you are wanting us to consider?
Yeah, that was the kind of principled bit of advocacy.
I might leave the mayor to comment beyond
what I've, uh, said.
I think he's okay. Okay. Okay.
Thank you. Um, um, good day everybody.
Mayor Brown, uh, nice to talk to you on this.
I've got a question about the, uh,
what's being designed in regards to consultation
and future planning, um, for the region
and specifically the Auckland Regional Transport Committee.
Uh, when you're, when you're out engaging with the public,
I'm assuming, uh, that you undertake to, uh, make, you know,
uh, make the plans that are being engaged on public, um,
appropriate, um, have it, uh, open to people
who can be encouraged to, uh, submit on things
that affect them or they have an interest in the plan,
but this is, or plans, this is
how your council would operate, I'm assuming.
Well, I think that, I mean,
I'm agreeing with what you're saying.
I mean, mean, we are, we, we are wanting people to have, we,
we can solve on everything anyhow.
Yeah. Cool. So follow up to that.
Um, why do you think it would be needed to have, uh,
specific subsections in the bill regarding consultation,
specifically with Maori, uh,
and also, uh, when the plan is being, like, if,
if you've got, you know, we've got great consultation, uh,
already laid out in the bill in regards to
how public can engage
and all members of the, why do you think we need a specific
section for Maori?
And then also in the preparation of the plan, you know,
the direction comes from the Minister
of Transport and the mayor.
Uh, there's also a part to, uh, to have another separate,
uh, pathway for Maori to consult.
So why do you think we need both of those, uh, situations?
Uh, I kind of, we've got used to it really,
rather than why we need it.
And it just seems to be the way that things happen.
So, um, I think you're in a position
to have more say on that than I am.
So you would, I I mean, I, I want, I like
to hear from all members of the public,
and they come in various shapes and sizes and,
and there are various roots towards us for that.
Uh, it's, it's just comes the way things are, you know,
I think rather than is it absolutely necessary?
Possibly because, not because we have Tehir Kura
who are an independent, married, statutory board
on the council, and that actually works better than
what you'd think, surprisingly enough, because So
You're, you're saying there, brown, if I, if I, if just
because this has been the way things are done doesn't mean
it needs to be the way it's been implemented in this bill.
Yeah, it's not an issue that I'm gonna fight in the ditch,
and I'm so excited about actually having some say myself,
let alone, um, the, the groups, other groups.
I mean, I've, oddly enough, uh,
the at don't have to consult with the mayor.
And, um, so I think of my, myself as a,
as a large group of a, with 180,000 plus
behind me who I'm, and,
and I see myself as a separate group there,
which would be nice to be able to be talked to as well.
So as far as the other bits
and pieces go like that, you know, you, you,
you're polishing the stone or not as far as that goes.
So I'm not disagreeing with you
or agreeing, it's just the way it goes.
Is that all right? I'm not a very doctrinaire person.
You might have noticed.
Um, I've, well, I've got about three minutes left
and I've got a question first, so I gotta take that,
and if you've time left, I'll ask for leave.
Um, look, just, um, question.
Um, Wayne, I think you mentioned the port just briefly in
your 30 in 30 years, um, you've also in the, um,
in the submission, um, there's some points, uh,
around freight and so on.
Just be interested in, um, either Wayne or Phil
or Andy, um, what your, your thoughts are in terms of, uh,
where transport goes.
And I particularly ask that as, you know,
we are doing a ports, some maritime, um, uh, having ports,
some maritime conversation seems like a big strategic issue,
just not for the city, but for the country as a whole.
Well, that, this comes back to it,
when I had the discussion, my first briefing over this
secret harbor crossing yesterday, it's more than just about
repairing some trusses to the bridge.
It's about the whole flow of income into the country
and the, um, growth in, um,
agriculture and horticultural trade will largely come out
of Northland at the moment
because you can't fit another cow onto, onto Wild Catto,
and you can hardly get another curry for a tea cookie.
But there's huge growth up north
and that, that will drive more use of Northland Port.
And probably far more important than even a harbor crossing
is the railway out to Marsden Point.
And whilst that's not in my council, it's adjacent to it
and has a big impact upon it.
And once we get to the stage where more
and more stuff goes through Northport,
which is 50% closer than tower, um,
that will have an impact on the, the, um,
pressures on the port here, which I have
to say is operating profitably, which I'm delighted about.
And, uh, and that's good,
but the land that's sitting on is
could return much more than just stacking boxes on it.
And then the fullness of time, there'll be a change there.
And in the fullness of time, there'll be more
warehouses out to the northwest.
And so these things have to be thought about when we, we do
that, and that will be part of a 30 year plan.
And the 30 year transport plan will be having to think about
what are the, um, big economic drivers
for the upper North Island.
And, uh, and so it has to be thought
of in much more broader terms
than just repairing the bridge.
I, I think that's very helpful. Um, I, I'm prepared
to take one question, but
because I don't have a a whip slip,
I'm only gonna take it if there is leave to ask.
Yeah. So hang on. Wait, wait, wait.
I just wanna check whether there's leave
for Simon to ask a question.
If there's not, then that'll be No.
Oh, okay. Sounds good. I don't care.
I'm like, as long as it's quick. Yep. Sorry,
Question as long as it's quick. Okay. While
you go.
Good morning, uh, your worship Mayor Brown, um, it's great
to hear your vision for Northwest and distribution, um,
and how that ties into the wider economy.
I just wanna ask you a question about Auckland Transport.
As a CapEx delivery agency
and, uh, responsible for maintenance in the region, uh,
some constituents have raised concerns about whether
Auckland Council being responsible for the transport
function will somehow dilute or derail CapEx
and maintenance delivery.
So, um, uh, mayor,
what assurances can you provide Auckland is that, uh,
projects will be delivered on time
and on budget under your governance.
Well, they're not being been delivered on time
or on budget or even a good standard now.
So, um, that's one of the major drivers.
I mean, I, I have,
and that my enormous personal experience in CapEx delivery,
and I keep wondering why the roads
that I put up in my subdivisions cost this last more
and get down quicker than anything that's done
by any government or quasi government, uh, department.
So you can rest assured that that is a huge focus
for, for myself.
So, um, uh,
I think the immediate changes will be that the organization
of, of those cer of delivery
of those things when it comes into here, will be set up
around the tasks rather than skill sets.
So we will be saying, we are going to do
and upgrade a road, whether it's a tar sealed road
or an unsealed road, first of all, there will be,
in a much the same way as we have brought in CapEx rules
for everything within the council, it has to go
through a 10 point thing.
What is the problem you're solving?
What, how, how can you standardize this?
Because we have bespoke solutions for everything under or
and transport at the moment, which is why things cost
so much and p**s people off so much.
So that total standardization across all delivery
of CapEx will become not an option.
It'll become what you have to do straight away.
And so rest assured, um,
and when I looked at this thing here
with all these people involved, um,
it's no wonder it's a c**k up.
And, um, and so, uh, you can,
that that's one area I'm confident there'll be an immediate
and sustainable improvement
because we need to do things in a much, and,
and you have to be fair, that water care,
which we've had some work in changing their budgetary, um,
and the problems with water care was more, uh, associated
with their balance sheets than actually doing the work.
They actually quite a, a, an they by
and large, quite good at delivering things on time
and on budget and that great big, um, pipe crosses the city.
The central interceptor is more or less on budget and more
or less on time, which is something
that the City Rail Link cannot be accused of.
Thank you. Uh, mayor Brown, very helpful.
I I do wanna comment that, uh, please, that, um,
across the council group,
our capital program is just under $4 billion
and is actually delivered, um, to 90% plus,
um, of, of budget in any one year across water care,
the council in Auckland Transport.
So we're talking about the quality of spend, uh, here.
Um, there is no question in my mind that we will continue
to deliver, um, very, um, effectively against
that capital program.
It's the expectation of our elected members,
and that's what the organizations do
That on that very positive note, I think
what we'll do is we'll, we'll call, um, time, uh,
now we've got other submitters
to come in and have a talk to us.
We would undoubtedly like to have further conversations.
We go through this process and we'll just
work out how we can do that.
But really, thank you very much
for all your input this morning.
Really appreciate it. And,
uh, looking forward to working together.
Thank you very much. And members, thanks very much.
Thanks so much. Yeah, thank you.
Could have gone worse,
Right? Look, thank
you very much. Um, we've got your submission,
uh, Delaney, thank you.
Um, and we can, you can treat, take that as read.
If there's things you want to highlight,
um, please, uh, do that.
Um, the, um,
well then I'll set, set the thing
and ask for, um, give you doing anyway.
I, I'll sort that out while, while you speak,
but in your hands and I'll,
I'll let you know With about four minutes.
Go. We do like to ask questions, so, um,
in your hands and away you go.
Great. Thank you very much
and thank you for the opportunity, um, to be here today.
Present with you. Uh, my name is Delaney Myers.
I'm the Chief Executive of the New Zealand Bus
and Coach Association.
Our members provide all public transport bus services in
Auckland and across alt, which makes us uniquely positioned
to have clear visibility on what does
and what does not work when it comes
to public transport governance.
This bill is about governance,
but really what I'm going
to talk today about is accountability specific
to public transport delivery.
Our members consider
that Auckland Transport performs better than any other
public transport authority.
A significant reason
for this is the clarity of accountability.
In most regions, there's a split between
who manages the public transport service delivery,
so the Public Transport Authority, or PTA
and the road controlling authority that is responsible
for operating and maintaining the public transport
infrastructure and facilities.
Time and time again,
we see public transport authorities being hamstrung by RCAs,
who do not place the same priority on ensuring a good public
transport experience.
As the PTA does,
good public transport requires a fully coordinated system
approach of planning services
and supporting facilities and infrastructure.
In our experience, the only way
that is fully coordinated is when one organization
has accountability.
Right now, those organizations are Auckland Transport
and the unitary authorities around New Zealand.
The bill splits accountability
for public transport service delivery in Auckland.
By not recognizing
that public transport service delivery is more than ensuring
the buses, trains,
and ferries roll in day in day out,
it is absolutely contingent on solid long-term planning
and goes hand in hand with the maintenance
and operations of supporting infrastructure
and facilities like stations,
interchanges and boarding points.
I ask you to consider this, what is the premise
behind the proposed structure as it relates
to public transport?
Do you believe at currently delivers
public public transport services?
Well, if so,
and you believe it should remain separate from Auckland
Council, then you must give it the enabling tools
to allow it to succeed.
Or do you consider at, does not
currently deliver public transport services?
Well, if so, then you should recognize
that stripping back key aspects
that enable a strong performance dooms it to worse outcomes.
And the bill should instead require in that case, so
that Auckland Council takes end to end responsibility.
Where accountability for performance sits matters.
I spent my career in large government organizations
and the priority of everything is determined by
where the accountability sheets home to.
The performance of a large government organization will be
directed by its high level deliverables
and measures, which will be sliced
and diced into priority measures
and filtered down through the organization with each layer
of management, prioritizing the things
that will be measured and reported.
Back up the chain where you split accountabilities,
use your room for finger pointing and bureaucratic mess.
So what does the Auckland Organization, whatever it may be
for public transport, need to succeed?
Firstly, and obviously it needs to be well resourced
and have a clear mandate, it then needs to be afforded.
The required tools to deliver those tools are
accountability for the long term planning
for public transport.
So it should be responsible
for the regional public transport plan,
but with clarity on the levels of service
Auckland Council wants for the community,
it must design the public transport network delivering
to the levels of service that council specifies.
It must manage the performance
of the contracted service providers, bus, rail, and ferry.
And it must maintain and operate the supporting
infrastructure and facilities required for a good
customer experience.
The Bus and Coach Association
and our members want Auckland is
to have a great public transport system.
We consider the proposed structure will give worse public
transport outcomes than the status quo
Public transport services, the operation
and maintenance of public transport facilities
and infrastructure
and public transport planning, including preparation
of the regional public transport plan,
must all sit in one organization
for effective public transport delivery.
Thank you. Thanks, Delaney. We've got about, uh, four
and a half minutes left, so great timing, Dan.
Thanks for your submission. Delaney.
Um, we've just heard from all from the council, um,
in their submission, and it's quite clear why they want
to split planning and delivery.
Um, in terms of the new CCO, my understanding is
that it will be responsible for essentially the points
and 0.7 that you will be, that you allude to in terms of,
um, basically all the delivery and,
and they'll still be dealing with contracts
with bus companies, so they can include in those contracts.
But I'm just wondering if does, does,
does the legislation not actually meet your needs in terms
of the, the delivery aspect is still there.
I I, I can't see what's changing.
So what is not clear
to us in the way the legislation is needed is
that supporting infrastructure and facilities.
Mm-hmm. So I'm talking about who's responsible for, um,
operating and maintaining, um, stations, um,
who's responsible for operating
and maintaining, um, around the bus stop areas.
Um, places where, um, where people, um, board
and disembark along the way.
Now if the intent is that
that sits within Auckland Transport, then then
that's, sorry, that, sorry.
The CCO, excuse me, excuse, excuse my slip there.
Um, then that's great, but I think there needs
to be an awful lot more clarity within that, around where
that responsibility, um, will actually sit.
Um, and the point which was not clearly made within my
submission, um, is, is that around
that longer term planning aspect as well,
because I think it's really important that we don't get into
that ivory tower situation of planning occurring, um,
without that being absolutely hand
in hand with service delivery.
Thank you. Just so, just following on that question,
don't anybody else at the moment Oh, okay, Kim.
Um, but, um, just the, in your list, the one thing
that is not there that I can see, um,
is bus priorities on the bus lanes, et cetera.
Um, who should be, 'cause that really is a place of Yeah.
Potential contest between a eroding authority
and a public transport
authority. And, and I that's what your
Thoughts there. Yeah, I think we draw
the line is always the difficult bit
around where that line goes.
Um, our view is that bus lanes, for all intents
and purposes, are an extension of that roading corridor, and
therefore it makes sense that those would probably sit, um,
with a road controlling authority.
Okay. Um, but
Then you can potentially deal with some of those issues
because you've got a seat at the table for the trans,
a non-voting seat at the table for the CCO proposed.
And then you've also got the strategic plan and,
and the ltps and all the other sort of things which can,
the council's obviously gonna have a, a very strong view of
how those things work.
If I know the way the councils work,
if they actually have control of the seat of the, uh,
of the public transport
And, and so much of that is
how it lands on the ground, I think with the planning.
Um, and, and that's where so often we see in places, um,
where there is a separation of planning duties
and delivery for public transport, um, that's where we see,
um, you know, more and more challenges arise, frustrations,
um, and behaviors that may not be optimal
for the delivery of public
Transport. Thank you.
Can last question. Okay. Any other questions?
Got about a minute and a half, but
that's really, really clear.
I really appreciate it. Thank you, Delaney. Thank you
Very much. Very much.
You Thank you. Okay.
Then we've got, um, max Marshall, um,
who is here by I said in person.
Hi Max.
Hi Max. Hi. We've got you down
for five minutes Max if you want to take your, um,
submission as rep, but I'll,
I'll give you a call about two minutes
to go if you, um, are still going.
Yes, yes. Questions. Okay. Uh, thank you Mr.
Chair and thank you, um, panel for giving me the opportunity
to speak today.
I wanna speak exclusively about, uh,
and about national public transport.
How developing a separate regional governance would conflict
with the development of a national network
where the state is owner and operator.
I admit the cry, let's be more equitable in sharing the
burden to who needs fringe groups anyway,
is politically a short distance.
If we use a governance model, we run the risk
of invigorating the political, emotional
and symmetrical dynamic of resentment and entitlement.
Entitlement is a far more dangerous risk to democracy
for the demands of the civil minimum to be applied
to Auckland or any other region for that matter,
as a separate system as it will harm it.
I want a system that is about contribution,
which is locality neutral.
For this reason. I do not think that, uh,
it should correlate to location means
that the contribution of one person should matter more, uh,
of more be of more importance than a person
living in another part.
But that is part of what is on the table here
because the transport needs of Auckland are the same
as the needs in Auckland and sorry, in Targa
or Queensland Queenstown.
The solution and choices are the same being made
by planners all over the country.
This is not political.
These issues are technical
and require a system as a whole approach by design,
the provision of public transport
should be one which is national.
So I argue and I argue, so I argue a country so small
and with a unitary state, the best efficacy is
through a monopoly owned
and operated by the state as a public good.
The current public operator, um,
ironically is a successor to the old New Zealand railways,
roads service, albeit through many different hands.
I will preface my thoughts in the words of the theorist
Kenchi Omar.
He says, historically the ethos
of equally shared contributions to the common good,
even though the benefit may not be shared quite so equally,
has been the foundation on which genuinely,
genuinely democratic.
Uh, societies no less than nations that have gone
around them rest when that wanes
or goes into clips, so does the glue
that holds those together.
The tyranny of modern democracy is that it tends
to give equal weight to votes
before contributions to the maintenance
of society as a whole.
Um, everywhere the result is the same.
I take, um, is the same elected officials,
just like a candidate trying to replace them,
focus their attention and their language on promise, equity
of results, not contribution, not contributions.
A public project of this scale is precisely this.
I think traditionally I've never seen,
I've never seen Auckland
as a separate entity in its own. You've
Got just under two minutes left.
Having a governance embraces instead this notion there is
a danger that the policy could replace the problem policy,
pro problem that is trying to solve.
Having this authority could act as a proxy to act as, uh,
and act for unintended consequences.
New ex, um, exclusionary zoning by stealth,
I'm not gonna argue why this is not good.
Acquiring the ability to develop road networks
and separate public transport systems could lead
to unnecessary track development
of mainly single family zoning units playing into the
interests of big property developers selling off the plan,
creating thus more urban spool such as the Murda
and Melton West and Melbourne, for instance.
We are a small country,
but the necessity we have
for having a national public network,
as I envisioned is greater.
Thank you, max. Have you got any questions, colleagues?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you Max. Just one.
Um, your written submission talks about the opposition
to the bill 'cause it uses political members.
I I heard that's elected members
elsewhere around the country.
Regional transport committees do have that structure
where elected members are part of that.
Are you saying that you only don't want that for Auckland?
Or is or is an opposition to that across the entire country?
I no, you have one, um, one single, a single entity.
So yeah, I guess, yeah, you call centralized.
A centralized is a centralized system.
Okay, cool. Thanks Max. Thank you very much.
That, that takes us to within
about a few seconds of, uh, time.
So thank you very much. Appreciate it.
Right. We have, um, on Zoom, Connor Sharp
and I presume that the, the Connor's um, uh,
submission is the one that
actually doesn't have a name on it.
Uh, check that it's the one that was in that,
that order, the material.
So Connor, welcome.
Hello, uh, we've got, uh, um,
all the committee in the room so we can all hear from you.
We've got you down for five minutes.
You can take, uh, your submission as read.
Uh, I'll give you a call. Two minutes to go.
'cause we, we do like generally ask a question,
so, um, in your hands.
Sweet. Um, I guess apologies.
My written submission was a bit of a weekend job.
Um, but my name's K Sharp.
I have been involved in advocacy around transport
and urban issues for the last couple years.
Um, and well, I won't go into detail.
I'm also working on a book about, um, some
of the major transport decisions
that have happened in Auckland, uh,
over the last sort of decade.
Um, so I feel pretty safe to say a lot
of the things I'm saying and, um, I think I know a lot
of the background between, you know,
why we have governance issues
and why, um, something like this reform is needed.
Um, broadly, I agree with the legislation, um,
although I have some concerns around, uh, the, uh,
regional transport committee, particularly around the
proportion of central governments, uh, appointees
to local government as well as, uh,
which I didn't actually put in my submission,
but I did here, um, discussed during walking councils, um,
earlier today, uh, around, uh, the opportunities
for more cross party work.
So, um, I think history has shown us both pre
and post super city that when central governments have had
more influence than um, you know,
the local government at the time, um, around major decisions
around, you know, major projects, um,
this has generally been a net negative.
Um, and this is not a case of, you know, one government led
by national labor or whatever.
This has just happened throughout.
Um, a good example is the northwest, uh, northwest busway,
which, um,
if it had been done back in the 2010s, uh, it would've been cheaper.
It would've been done by now. Um, it didn't happen due
to ministerial influence at the time.
Uh, when you fast forward to the government switching to
that labor government at the time, um, you know,
they had different priorities, uh,
and they wanted to look at, uh,
other options like black rail metros that then delayed it,
you know, further, um, until we reached this point today
where we are building it for, um,
multiple billions more than we would if we had
just done it back in 2010.
Um, if so,
I think the proportion of um, you know,
appointees should be more geared towards,
um, you know, local government.
So perhaps you know, four from Auckland council
and then two from central government.
Um, central government should still have a role obviously,
but um,
you want more input I think from people who know Auckland best.
Um, secondly, um, was around the entire purpose
of the RTC is around long-term, you know, strategy
and planning with things like the 30 year plan.
Um, this is kind of the perfect entity to
embed more cross party, you know, consensus
and the long-term stuff, you know,
in a bigger city which would benefit
Auckland as well as obviously New Zealand.
Um, and so I think,
and the other thing is this is the only opportunity you
probably have to do this
because, you know, if this legislation passes as it is
and you know, all three, um,
central government appointees are appointed by the minister,
um, there's no incentive for a future government
of a different elk, um, to appoint, you know, other people.
'cause when there was an opportunity to do
otherwise, you know, there wasn't that,
um, I guess cross by input, right?
So there wouldn't be any, you know,
I wouldn't recommend personally,
like there wouldn't be any trust there.
I think. So. Um,
and given, you know, the RTC while it feeds into, um,
I guess funding decisions from whatever government is at the
time through things like the GPS, ultimately
that is still controlled by the government at the time.
So they will still be able to do their own priorities.
It's just, in this case, um, the sort of overall plan
and strategy has a lot more consensus
than it otherwise would.
Um, so I'm not sure how exactly, you know, the details, um,
was up to you guys, but it could be like one, um,
central government appointee is appointed
by, uh, the minister.
Um, as you've
Got about, you've got Connie,
you've got about a minute and a half left.
Yeah, almost done. Um, one could be appointed
or like put forward by the opposition
and the third could be, um, jointly agreed.
So I think this is the only case you can do it,
but, um, sorry, the only opportunity.
But yeah, um, those are my kind of two main points.
I probably could speak about this forever, but, okay.
Any questions colleagues, Julian? Sure.
Uh, thanks so much Connor.
Uh, really worthwhile submission.
I'm just wondering if, um, you think that there needs
to be some like cross party input into the appointees,
the ministerial appointees,
and if you have a thought on how that might be done,
because I know there's some, uh,
committees like the Representation Commission have an
opposition nominee who obviously needs to be signed off
by government as well, as well as the government nominee.
Um, would it be better if there was cross party input
to all three ministerial nominees
or there was one that was maybe dedicated to, um,
the opposition parties?
Or how, how do we get that cross party representation
and input from the government end so that we can get a,
a genuine sort of long term consistency?
Um, there are different ways you can do it, as you'd say.
Like all three could be sort of jointly,
um, you know, put forward.
Um, I suspect that would be quite difficult
'cause um, just knowing how often parliament works,
you might not be able to agree on three.
But if it was, um, as I sort of suggested,
like you maybe have one appointed by the minister
of the government at the time, you have one put forward by,
um, the opposition and the opposition parties can agree,
I guess, how that's, um, whatever that, that is done.
Um, as well as you have one that's, I guess jointly agreed
between, um, the government and the opposition parties.
Um, 'cause if you look at the, um,
how Auckland Council works
and for example, the, uh, three councils
that are put forward by, or, you know, going
to be put forward, assuming there's three of them, um,
you have sort of one in the middle
and then you have two on sort of different sides of the, um,
guess argument you could say
about transport, you know, politically.
So you have that diversity of view there,
but you won't from central government.
Um, and I think if you're looking, you know, back, um,
with things like the Auckland Transport Alignment plan, um,
Even though there might've been agreement between local
and the government at the time, that did kind
of evolve as you went forward.
Um, and I think if you don't have parliamentary
consensus on these long-term plans, you are always gonna get
that bit of, you know, switching.
'cause Atap evolved quite a a lot from
its first iteration of 2016.
Connor. Connor, thank you. Yeah, I'm gonna need
to wind you up 'cause we, we've got the
next submitter, um, waiting.
So, but thank you. Really appreciate that.
And it's a theme, which another a number
of echos, so thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Take care.
Right. Okay, now we have, uh,
and it is in this zoom by zoom by zoom, okay.
Coming through. We've got the, uh, PSA
Good morning everyone.
Welcome. Um, you can treat your submission as, as read.
Uh, if you wanna highlight anything that you want to, um,
to say, then do that.
I'll give you a call with about four minutes to go.
We do like asking questions. So, um, uh, in your hands,
Kiara, we are Sonya Lister, Benedick Ferguson,
and Tom Buckley from the PSA,
I'll speak briefly from the perspective
of PSA members at Auckland Transport.
Benedict will speak on his experience at Auckland Council
and Thomas' PSA assistant national Secretary
for local government across the country will speak on the
changes PSA believes are needed
to the transition provisions in the bill.
A-T-P-S-A members have noted
that the transition into Auckland Council may present
opportunities, especially in terms
of utilizing project knowledge related
to infrastructure delivery
and collaboration with other agencies such as NCTA
and the various utility providers for the Auckland region.
A primary objective is to maintain effective
and equitable transport services for all Aucklands.
Achieving this in involves ensuring adequate representation
and input from Aucklands within the new decision making
structures is also important to
minimize any negative effects on the transportation projects
that cross local board boundaries while prioritizing
safety and accessibility.
Another consideration is retention
of talent within 80 staffing who have contributed
to many successful projects such as the Eastern Bus way
and very electrification providing suitable transition
provisions can help reduce the risk
of key personnel seeking employment elsewhere,
including Australia.
I'll now pass on to Benedict. Thank you,
Uh, Gilda.
Uh, thanks for letting us speak today.
Uh, Benedict Ferguson, of course, P-S-A-P-S-A delegate
and have been a long serving, uh,
local government worker in Auckland for over 23 years.
Um, this reform is the biggest change
that Optum will face since 2010.
I've got lived experience of the transition at that time
and have some suggestions on how
to improve the upcoming reform.
What made the transition work back in 2010 was a strong
worker voice, strong worker engagement in the transition
agency and workers
and unions working together with councils to bring about a,
a real change to how local
government has delivered in Auckland.
That strong worker voice enabled a much smoother transition
for workers into the new entities
and need to better outcomes for the public communities
of Auckland and the government of that day.
You'll see from our submission
that we're promoting proposing engagement
with the transition director.
This is to further support the current productive working
relationship that the PSA has with both Auckland Council
and Auckland Transport.
Our focus on any change is ensuring just transition
for workers that no work is left behind by any impacts
of restructuring
or transition, uh, reform such as this,
making sure this reform is a success for all parties
and the communities we serve as a ultimate goal for the PSA.
We know from experience and when workers are engaged in
transitions, they're smoother, expertise is retained,
and Auckland is get the best possible outcome.
Let's learn from the past and get this right for the future.
I'll hand over to Tom now,
who's gonna speak a bit more detail about, uh,
the context of our submission.
Thank you.
Good. And, um, um,
thank you very much for letting me speak.
I'm just speaking to the transitional provisions put out in
the, um, in the proposed legislation
and on behalf of the PSA, I'm just, um, talking to
that we are conscious that any change process,
particularly one, um, so significant
as this has an impact on output, um,
and the organizational focus.
So we're conscious, we work through this process of the, um,
legislation and the transition of how we best, um,
tackle those issues.
And I wanted to talk to that workers are affected
by a change process like this.
Um, there is significant insecurity
and stress that's caused, we're keen to avoid that
'cause we don't wanna see experienced workers, um,
with skills that are needed in Auckland for this, um, work
to be lost because of a poor transition process.
And the PSA has significant experience in large,
in large scale transition,
like we are seen here proposed under the legislation.
Um, this is one of the poorest transition,
um, proposals we have seen.
We've written to you around that in our, in our submission,
and we've recommended a number of changes
to help address those.
And included in that is that there is, um, an obligation
to follow the employment agreements
that have been negotiated between workers and at,
and also with Auckland Council, following a process
that involves good faith as a core principle
of the employment relationships.
And also ensuring that worker engagement is occurring
to make sure that a just transition occurs
of those skills workers, um, into the new entity.
Uh, the bill, um, offers no explicit protection for workers
who are affected by, um, work visas tied to open transport.
And we feel this is important to be addressed, um,
through the legislation to ensure
that we do not lose workers who have important skills, um,
that are needed in the future of, um, the work around, um,
that has been set up here.
Um, we have, um, um,
and we will, when we want to, um, make it very clear,
we want best, um, practice
to be applied in terms of this transition.
'cause we want to have positive downstream outcomes
for the workers involved,
but also for Auckland as, um, the council
and for Auckland Transport through this process.
And so we wanna avoid any unnecessary disruptions, delays
or expenses including, um, any, um, issues
that have fallen from the transition process itself.
The bill itself overrides the, um, Auckland Transport
and PSA agreement, um, around employment,
employment protection provisions that are important
to ensure that good change practice does occur
and, um, that good faith should be engaged in.
We're keen to make sure that legal disputes are avoided
and we're asking the bill, um, as clarifying the role
around the need for a worker input
to the transitional director as obligations to consult
and seek that input from them.
Equally, in a similar way with the Auckland chief executive,
as they consider roles
that have been placed into Auckland Council,
that they again seek the input of workers
who are experts on the work that they do
and helps to design a, a, a appropriate roles
inside the new entity that will work well
for the city. We've
Got Four the impacts. Sorry,
We've got four minutes left.
Thank you. Well, we're just finishing.
So, um, we're just conscious
of the impacts we're seeking this change to work well
for Auckland and for these organizations
and the workers involved here.
And that concludes, um, my or comments.
Brilliant, brilliant, brilliant timing. Thank you.
Um, Tangi, and then I've got a question too. Yes.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank you
to the PSA for your submission.
Um, in particular at paragraph 11,
your concerns have been very clearly articulated,
and I'm not sure you managed to hear that, uh,
Auckland Council's submission this morning.
But, uh, you, if not you, you can rest assured
that the council themselves have some concerns
around the transitional arrangements
that will no doubt work through.
But can I look at, um, paragraph 19, which is about the, um,
the way in which the regional
Transport committee is structured.
Your submission says
that you think the balance is not struck there.
Um, can you tell me, do you think that that can be, uh,
rectified by having an increase in local membership numbers?
Or how do you see that balance being corrected?
Can Sonya or Benedict you would like to answer that?
Otherwise I can,
Uh, thank you Tom. Uh,
yes, we, we do a agree with that point
that if there is mo more local, uh, balance that
that could be rectified.
Correct. Thank you. Thanks.
I got two questions from me.
I'll start with that one as well.
Um, you've actually said a minister appointed chair,
which in that paragraph, which is not actually correct,
'cause jointly ministerial and,
and mayor appointed,
we did ask questions about
whether it should be the mayor or the council.
Um, but just in terms of, I, I, the council said that,
that they actually really like this
as a partnership arrangement
and we, we haven't asked for some advice on what level
of financial input there is
between the council and the Crown.
Uh, so we'll get that advice,
but that, you know, that may show the Crown puts some more
or make sure the council puts
more speculatively the crown, actually.
But we'll see how we go with that. Um,
but I just thought I'd reflect that back to you
and see whether you, uh, have a view on that.
I let Ben did answer that one. Thank you.
Yeah, I think it goes back to our comment that Sonya made
around, um, getting the local democracy in there
and having that real local focus.
So it's, it's being run by Aucklands
that now Auckland who have been elected.
That would be my comment on there.
Interesting comment you made around funding.
I'll just come back to that later.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah, no, I think,
I think it was just making
sure the crown's tied into things.
And look, the, the other one is just the transition,
most importantly transition process.
So the, the council, uh, did you hear the,
the council submission?
No, we didn't hear the all submissions. We,
So they basically said, look, this should,
the transition process should be with the CE of council ce.
So rather than having a, as a, an unspecified, um, uh,
transition director
and be subject to all the, the normal council, uh,
all the normal employment et cetera processes, does that,
I mean, I know there's a lot of detail in the devils
and detail, but that's what you really want to see happen.
Generally we're aligned with that position.
Yeah. Okay. No, that's, that's really helpful. Okay.
No, very much appreciated. Thank you.
Any other questions, colleagues?
No, look, that's really clear.
Really appreciate it. And, um,
we'll keep an eye on those issues.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Kiki too.
Oh, sorry, I should have asked one more.
I forgot timing for transition,
seeing there's two of you still there?
Yes. Um, council's, oh, sorry, Benedict,
I should have asked Timing for transition.
The council's view was that probably move reasonably quickly
rather than leaving, um, longer uncertainty.
I think that's the way I read what they were
saying. Got a view on that.
Uh, we, we always try and strike a reasonable balance.
If it delays too long, there is a negative outcome.
If we go too quickly, it can be too.
So I guess we're looking for
how do we appropriately set that up?
We are, we're keen to engage
and we are engaging with both Auckland, uh, um, transport
and council around that process.
But if we can, um, make sure
that the time allows appropriate input,
that would be appreciated.
So the legislation should be flexible
to make sure that that's allowed for.
I think that's helpful, yes. Okay.
No, good. Thank you. Sorry about that.
Okay. Very much. Thank you very much.
Thanks. Right. Okay.
We have next, um, magi Community Planning group
by Zoom
and no relationship.
I'm pretty sure that you know of.
I think we have met though. Oh, welcome.
Um, look, we've got your, um, extensive, um, uh, submission,
um, which you can take us read,
that's the things you wanna highlight, then please do.
Um, but, um,
I'll give you a call when there's about four minutes to go
because we, uh, we always like asking
questions, but in your hands.
Oh, you, sorry, you're on mute. So, by the way,
Can you hear me correctly now? Yep.
Yep. Lab clear now.
Okay, fine. Thank you very much. Uh, good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the committee. I'm Bill Foster, chair
of the Northern Action Group.
And with me, if he can handle the technology,
is Pete Simpson, chair of the Ang Community Planning Group.
Uh, we've submitted as a group of experienced roading,
engineers and professionals,
and our focus here is practical, ensuring the transmission,
the transition of Auckland transports responsibilities
to Auckland Council delivers better outcomes, especially
for rural areas like Rodney and Franklin.
Now, firstly, we fully support the Bill's intent
to restore accountability for transport
to Democratic decision makers to integrate planning
of transport, land use, and community development,
and to increase responsibility at the local
level, wherever that's feasible.
But our concern is that
unless the transition is independently designed
and managed, Auckland Council will simply absorb Auckland
Transport and continue its current centralized
silo based approach, a model that has not worked
for rural districts.
Auckland council's management systems are functionally
fragmented and city centered.
Over 15 years, they've become embedded
staff hold the institutional knowledge.
Elected members rotate the structure. Now resists adaption.
Rural areas receive little or no network planning
or asset management tailored to their conditions
and communities experience poor coordination
and limited responsiveness.
Those of you from who are from Auckland will know
what I mean when I say that this bill is a rare opportunity
to help fix that in relation to transport infrastructure.
But it will not happen automatically.
If council designs the transition itself,
it will recreate the existing structure with new names.
So our first key submission is
that the transition must be designed
by an independent transition director
and team chosen for technical competence.
The plan should of course be reviewed by the council,
but approved by the minister to ensure
that the outcome reflects the intent of the bill
and not just institutional self preservation.
Our second submission is about the proposed use
of a road classification framework
to divide regulatory responsibility.
Now that approach is just conceptually wrong.
Classification systems, whether the old one network road
classification or NZ TA's one network framework,
which now supersedes it, uh, engineering tools.
They're not governance tools.
Writing them into law for this purpose will create confusion
and could freeze Auckland into using outdated categories.
For instance, there's no current legislative definition
of arterial road
and Collector Road isn't used in the modern framework.
And in Rodney, this isn't academic.
We have about 650 kilometers of unsealed roads,
roughly 80% of Auckland's total.
They serve two main functions, production routes for farming
and forestry and community connectors linking rural
settlements and coasts.
Their value depends on function, not traffic count.
Yet under Auckland transport's urban based model,
these differences aren't recognized leading
to inefficient spending and community frustration.
We're not asking the bill to decide which roads to seal.
We're asking that the governance model allow such decisions
to be made locally as they should be
with clear accountability.
Accordingly, we support the idea
that schedule four should be removed.
Instead, the bill should require the transition plan
to define which responsibilities are delegated
to the local boards, how they're funded,
and what management controls ensure those powers
can actually be used.
Delegating authority without resourcing makes the
delegation meaningless.
And locking delegations into the statute now would freeze
the design before the transition has even begun.
The transition plan is the correct instrument,
but Auckland Council should not be allowed to design it.
Finally, we recommend a rural subcommittee
of the Auckland Regional Transport Committee
to guide strategic planning for Rodney Franklin
and the islands.
These areas have different transport needs from metropolitan
Auckland, and that must be reflected in planning, not merely
through consultation.
To conclude, we support the intent of the bill.
The transition must be independently designed.
Governance structures should come first.
Classification systems should remain technical tools,
local decision making must be genuine, supported
with real capability and resources now.
Thank you. And we welcome questions.
Thank you much for that, bill.
Um, looks like you're doing this unsupported at the moment.
So your colleague does appear to have made it, uh,
right questions he mind.
But if you could just, just accept the prompt. He, sorry.
He needs to accept the prompt.
He needs to accept the prompt. Apparently
Having, having difficulty hearing that. Sorry, sir.
He needs to accept the prompt apparently.
So there's a prompt that, uh, the, uh, staff sent him.
Anyway, um, questions? No, very well, Mr. Submission.
Look, bill, thank you very much. I really appreciate that.
Can I ask one about the, it, the of,
but can that be done through the way in which, uh, the,
uh, the, the delegations are given to the Rodney, um,
the local bull for the Rodney area?
I'm not sure. Excuse me, I can't remember what it's called.
Or, and likewise, Franklin
and I know the islands get wrapped up in No,
they're they're separate as well, aren't they?
Sorry. Yeah, they're separate as well.
Yeah. So, so can
Franklin have unique situations whereby integrating the
different activities
that Auckland Council is responsible for?
And you're now talking about adding transport to that
is a problem because the timing,
because they're controlled through the management accounts,
which are management controls, which are budgetary mean
that the different bodies
and parties don't do things together in a timely way.
So we get a disconnect as we have now between infrastructure
and the provision of private development,
the water care services, which you all know about in,
in Walkworth and the transport services
for which there is no planning and no funding and no money.
And yet the plan is
to put another 30,000 people into the Walkworth
and region, the Rodney region. So that's
Another, that's another issue.
And it can be done.
But my question is in terms of the governance structure,
'cause that's where you wanted to start, is,
can the local boards be given the appropriate
delegations to do that work?
Or do you need something different?
Because you mentioned a subcommittee?
No, no. The, the way Auckland council plans
or suggest it should do it is the correct mechanism
because everything is there within the local government,
Auckland Council Act and the local government Act,
all the authorities and abilities to delegate.
But council has not shown any willingness
to depart from its centralized functional silo management
model on a one size fits all across the whole of Auckland.
What we think that doesn't work,
and it never has worked in Rodney
and in the rural parts of Franklin
and probably in the islands as well.
Okay. And yes, it can be done, but the plan to do it
and to allocate those responsibilities needs to be done
by some people outside the current framework
of Auckland Council, which has really embedded a structure
that it doesn't want it apart from.
Okay, that's fine. I'll leave
my second question, Julianne.
Oh, uh, thank you so much, bill, um,
and others for your submission.
I actually had a question about Maura's work on Hill
Street and Warworth.
Yes. Um, you, you are the group that, um, has done a lot
of work on that and are there, I guess I'd like to know
what, you know, how that is an example of the sorts
of things we need to think about in this legislation.
How we can ensure there's better outcomes for the community
and expert input, uh, rather than Yeah. Go. Thank you
Julie. I, I think the
answer is that these are examples of
how well getting together the professionals
and the locals who know what the needs are
and the resources available need to be,
uh, can actually help.
So we've been instrumental in improving the
design of Hill Street.
The roading engineers here through one Mai have actually,
they halved the cost of the MENA Link road
and turned it from two lanes into four lanes just
by actually applying their concepts to the design
and the original work that was done.
We have a lot of local expertise, which can be harnessed
by the local board and the council if it chooses to do so.
But the current management structures
that Auckland Transport has just don't allow that.
We have a good liaison with them,
but we can't change the system.
Bill, thank you. Uh, I thought the challenge there was
as much NCTA and funding as anybody else, but, um, yep.
Thank you and good work so far
and look forward to talking about that further.
Okay. Look, we are happy to answer any more questions
and come back if the committee has further question.
Thank you, sir. Thank you very
Much, bill. Really appreciate
it. Right. Okay.
Now we have, I think I've got the aa.
Yeah, Martin, welcome. Nice here.
So again, we've got you, uh, for 10 minutes.
We've got your submission in front of us, uh,
which you can take us, read anything you wanna highlight.
Sure. And I'll give you a call with four minutes to go.
Thank you. Uh, so my name is Martin Glenn.
I'm the AA policy director.
I'm gonna start with the proposed arrangements to improve
transport planning alignment between
Auckland Council and the government.
A the AA supports the Auckland Regional Transport Committee
or A RTC proposed membership and functions.
We strongly support the proposed 30 year transport plan
and its statutory links to Auckland Council, government
and NZTA planning and funding documents.
I wanna stress that retaining the proposed links in the
final legislation is essential if the plan is
to have any impact on long-term transport outcomes.
In Auckland, we are recommending a minor amendment
to bring the a RTCs meeting requirements in line
with all other regional transport committees
throughout the country.
Currently, clause 41 2 gives the A RTC discretion about
whether to meet in public or private.
We think this needs to be changed to be consistent, not just
with other RTCs,
but also with the Bill's Democratic accountability
objective, particularly given the very significant rate
payer funds allocated to transport.
I'm now gonna move on to the provisions
that retain a statutory transport council controlled
organization for public transport services.
We don't think decisions about public transport services can
be sensibly separated from decisions about where
to put bus stops, signs and bus lanes.
And those decisions require taking into account the
impact on other road users.
If the bill is passed in its current form,
further legislative change will be needed if problems emerge
and Auckland Council needs to take over responsibility
for public transport services, we think it makes more sense
to leave Auckland Council to consider whether any
of its transport responsibilities could be better delivered
by a transport CCO by using the CCO provisions
of the local government act.
Once the reforms are better done, our recommendation is
that the bill will be amended to remove the requirement
for continuation of statutory transport.
CCO and public transport services be included in Auckland
Council's responsibilities.
Turning now to the proposed division of responsibilities
between Auckland Council's governing body
and its local boards.
We don't think the proposed split the achieve the right
balance between local priorities and the core role.
Auckland STR network plays in connecting
people across the region.
It's another bespoke untested approach for Auckland,
in our view prescribing.
How those responsibilities will be split in legislation
risks, unintended consequences
we think the bull should be enabling
rather than prescriptive.
The council's governing body should have the flexibility
to decide what powers
and responsibilities would best sit
with local boards based on transport impacts, local boards,
preferences, and competencies.
This approach would also enable the governing body
to make changes to local board powers
and functions without the need for regulatory change.
We recommend clauses 47 A to D be amended
to provide the governing body with this flexibility subject
to engaging with local boards before making decisions
and that schedule four be deleted from the bill.
Moving on to the proposed road classification framework.
The ultimate purpose of the framework is
to identify the roads where local boards will be able
to exercise the transport powers and responsibilities
and schedule four of the bill.
A schedule four of bill is removed in line
with our recommendation.
It is unclear to us what value the framework will provide.
Conversely, the administrative costs of developing,
approving and maintaining a framework covering all roads in
Auckland seem likely to be considerable.
All we note from, um,
actually Auckland Transports notes, uh,
accompanying Auckland Council's submission
that last year Auckland, uh, got an extra 115 roads.
So that demonstrates to us how much
this framework is gonna be continually in, in motion
of being approved and developed.
So we, we are recommending that Clause 48,
which requires Auckland Council
to develop a Statey Road case location framework be
removed from the bill.
And finally, I'd just like
to set out Thea's position on the proposed process
for making bylaws under the Land Transport Act.
Our view is that giving the governing body full
responsibility for bylaws would deliver on the bill's
objective of improving de democratic accountability.
Without the added complexity
and time needed to secure approval from 21 local boards,
local boards could instead be consulted on
any proposed bylaws.
We've put forward an amendment to make that change.
Thank you. I'm very happy to take questions. Thanks
For much. I really appreciate
that. We've got about four,
almost five minutes left.
Uh, colleagues questions. Very straightforward. Clear.
That is very clear. Uh, cam did have a quick question.
Now, just to clarify, on the schedule four, um,
you're saying it'll be too hard
'cause it'll be in legislation.
It seems to be in regulation.
Uh, governor General
by Auditor Council may do the following,
insert power function responsibilities,
schedule four, is that enough
Flexibility? Um, it
still requires the, the minister, so probably,
I should've said regulation, so thank you for Yeah.
Pointing that out. It's still gonna require,
uh, the minister's of approval.
It seems incredibly convoluted to us that, um, in a city
that's the third size of New Zealand, it would have,
would have a bill that has so much prescription
and so much focus on local issues.
Uh, there's a reason why we have regional land transport
plans and, and why regional council, and that's
because transport patterns are fundamentally regional.
And that's Auckland's challenge.
So we see putting powers, whether they're in regulation
or legislation, we see that as, as,
as potentially problematic for the reasons I've highlighted.
Okay. Can I ask a question about the, the,
the public transport and the cco?
So Auckland councils also make a
similar sort of an argument Yep.
The map, but the fundamental,
their argument was in part not just having a CCO,
but also what their ability to be able
to put other functions into it if they say, yeah, what's,
um, your view about the merits of having PT in A CCO?
Because a lot of the time the public transport itself
is contracted at anyway.
Um, but it's, it's the, the direct exposure,
if there's a direct link between the council
and the, the operation, I can see it being challenging.
Yeah. Um, in terms of, particularly in terms of, um, yeah,
uh, managing, uh, industrial relations,
Uh, what we're seeing now submission is
that we think PT infrastructure needs
to go together with services.
That's, that's a real problem. The big challenge for all.
So, so if that's done. Yeah.
Um, well the problem is that infrastructure,
those infrastructure issues are, uh,
fundamentally road controlling authority functions
because you've, you've got other road users.
That's why Wellington City, when you were mia, you know,
has, has challenges with Wellington Regional Council.
It's the same with Hamilton Yow.
And it's the same with Christchurch and Canterbury.
We think that would be a, a kind of a,
we don't think you could just, it would be sensible
to just combine public transport infrastructure.
Yeah. Um, with services, it's the, the point is, is all,
all the functions that's the challenge
and transport, all the functions kind of go together there.
But there is a distinction. I'll take the, well example.
Yeah. They are two different councils in this instance.
There's one council and one council will have A-A-A-A-C-C-O,
which you can set all the correct, you know, statements
of court, uh, uh, uh, for, um,
corporate intent, et cetera, et
Cetera. A a acknowledge
that. But it's still separation.
And, and one of the reasons, uh, in fact in my view, the,
the primary reason we're around this table right now is
because there's, you know,
there's been a widespread view taken
that Auckland Transport, which is part of Auckland Council,
it's a CCO, it's, it's differences.
It's a statutory CCO is is is there's been that disconnect.
Yes. Um, so yeah, we, the key issue for us is
for Auckland is is about road space
and that that competition and that and that dynamism
and our view is it all needs to be managed together.
So do you, do you think that if potentially if Auckland
Council said they want the bus, you know, the bus ferries,
et cetera, to be business unit
or units of the council, that that would not come
with some other challenges?
It would depend where they draw the line.
So you could have things like ferry terminals
and the bus stations on the Busways.
That would, that would kind of make sense. Sense.
We're separate from the road space.
What we've highlighted is, is is bus lanes bus stops? Yes.
But where you cite them that, you know, needs
to take into consideration all road users and the impacts.
So I thought you were arguing for everything being
inside the council potentially
Our, that, that, that would be our preference.
Um, we think it, it's best to, given all the, um,
functions need to be kind of, um, managed together and,
and that that kind of competition, it's better that,
you know, our, it is better that they go together.
Our preference would be Auckland Council
to have the whole show or at least look at it.
This is a quite a, a quick process
and we understand it needs to be,
but to, to potentially look at it down the line
and make it, make it more considered
decisions that could be made to work.
Appreciate that. Look, thank you very much Martin.
We've just outta time, so really appreciate that.
Okay. Uh, we have now got a Jody Johnson campaign
for Better Transport via Zoom,
and that's again 10 minutes.
Okay. Good Morning. Committee members, can you hear me?
Yes. Perfect. Thank you for the, okay,
Welcome Jody. Um,
we've got your, we've got your
submission, which you could take us read.
Um, but if you wanna highlight things, we appreciate that.
Uh, I'll give you a call with, uh, four minutes to go.
We've got you for 10 minutes.
Uh, 'cause we do like to ask
questions at the end. So in your time,
Thank you so much, uh, chair.
Um, thank you for the opportunity
to submit on the local government Auckland Council Transport
Governance Amendment Bill the campaign for Better transport.
While we agree that the status quo isn't working
for Auckland, is we don't think
that this bill fixes the problem.
And in fact, we think that instead the existing provisions
of the Land Transport Management Act 2003
with some modifications would be a better approach.
We agree that Auckland Transport has suffered from a
perceived lack of democratic accountability leading
to a widespread feeling
that Auckland Transport has a specific agenda
that they would adopt regardless of the opinions
of the Auckland is that are impacted.
However, we see this bill
as shifting control from unelected
bureaucrats down to Wellington.
We see a proposal that would have an Auckland Regional
Transport Committee with half its membership appointed
by the Minister of Transport
and only half appointed by Auckland Council.
And we think that the number
of government representatives should be decreased
to a maximum of one consistent
with the Land Transport Management Act 2003.
We also think that under this bill,
local boards will be given far too much power.
Um, they do not have the resources
to handle the proposed powers.
And that instead the appropriate body for the governance
of local and collector roads should be, um, under one entity
as opposed to potentially multiple entities.
We are concerned that the proposals under the bill would
result in confusion for Aucklands, particularly
around items such as speed limits.
And while we do think that local boards have a role to play,
they, um, are better for items such as parking restrictions,
traffic calming
and town centers, that sort of thing,
rather than determining
that a particular road should have a cycle lane
and then a cyclist is peddling along that road
and then suddenly they realize the cycle lane disappears
because they've gone from one local board area
where cycling is a priority to another local board area
where cycling is not a priority.
Okay. Um, we are also pro concerned about some
of the more administrative proposals under the bill,
and we just think that these should be changed again,
to be consistent with the Land Transport Management
Act 2003.
Uh, for example, some of the procedures around meetings,
we think that Subpart four, subparts two
and three of the existing legislation provides for a series
of well established procedures for meetings.
And we see no reason why this should not be replicated
by the Auckland Regional Transport
Committee at a principled level.
We do like the plan for a 30 year transport plan.
We think that this should be adopted throughout the country
and not just for Auckland.
Uh, we note that government is increasingly making use
of 30 year plans for local areas.
So for example, the requirement for, uh, local areas to zone
for 30 years worth of housing.
And so we think that that should be spread throughout the
country and not just limited to Auckland.
And saying this though, we do think
that the following two objectives should be included, um,
among the other objectives.
And that is that of environmental sustainability
and the provision of transport choice.
We are comfortable with the retention of Auckland Transport
as a public transport provider.
Uh, we do think that having separation between the council
and the business end of public transport,
so the bus time tabling
and what buses operate on what routes
and so on, is a good thing
and helps at least depoliticize some
of the transport function in Auckland.
Uh, we do query whether consideration should be given
to adopting such an approach for Wellington, Canterbury
and potentially other regions where more advanced forms
of public transport are being used,
or whether Auckland Transport should be wound up altogether.
And the same approach should be adopted.
You can probably gather we have all four consistency
between the various regions in New Zealand.
Um, so as I mentioned alluded to
before, we don't think
that local boards should be granted the wide remit
of powers under proposed section 47 C.
Um, and instead that one body should be in control
of things such as speed limits, cycle lanes and the like.
Um, but we do think that local boards should have some role
in the application of certain
transport policies in their local area.
So things such as parking, um, things such
as traffic calming schemes and the like.
Um, so that's all I have to say.
Um, I do like leaving a ample amount of time for questions
and answers because that's well
where I think we get the most value.
So I, um, leave it to you to answer, ask any questions.
Look, thanks Jody. Um, we've done very well.
We've got just over five minutes. Welcome back.
I Williams. Nice to have you here.
I have a question Here we go. Hi, Jody.
Hello, rna. I disagree with some of your points
and I'm surprised, um, by submission, particularly
around the local boards.
Um, don't you think the answer is
to resource the local boards appropriately so that they can,
um, fulfill their functions under this bill?
Um, obviously they are the size of many councils
around the country or larger.
Um, having an element of local control, um,
is precisely the point here that, that you have argued for.
Um, why wouldn't we empower local boards to be able
to make decisions that are responsive
to the communities they represent so
that people can then have faith in, um, the kinds
of decisions around things like speed limits
and parking restrictions, um,
that we've, we've talked about.
Um, certainly there are merits
for resourcing local boards more appropriately if we are
gonna give them these powers.
We are concerned though, again,
about consistent application.
So a personal example, I live on a road that goes
through two local areas.
I'm not sure whether it'll be classified as an arterial road
or a collector road under this model.
And the road is basically the same the whole way through.
And the risk is, is
that one side gets a certain speed limit,
another side gets another speed limit.
There's inconsistency.
People inadvertently break the rules
because they think, oh, yep, I'm traveling down this
road, fifty's fine.
And then they suddenly get a ticket in the mail saying, no,
actually 50 is not the limit in that section
of the road, it's 30.
Um, and so that creates animosity
amongst the general public.
And so having one body that says,
these are the speed limits we're gonna adopt for Auckland,
or these are where we're gonna have cycle lanes
and the like, are much better.
We also think that genuine consultation would
take place anyway.
So you would get that localized input, uh, rather than,
you know, having brawls coming down from on high as it were.
Just, um, Jody, as someone who has submitted obviously
to Orland Facebook in the past, um, you have, you know,
they led the campaign
and tried to engage with, uh, Auckland Transport
and tried to get a local perspective
up about some of these issues.
How did that go, mate?
Because the feedback that I get is
that locally elected representatives are people
who can raise these issues, but trying to raise these issues
with Auckland Transport was always really impossible.
Our experience has been a little bit different.
Um, but again, it may be around the scale
of the issues identified.
So it is possible that, um, smaller scale issues may be,
um, not getting as much traction as some of the larger ones
that we, um, advocate for. Mm-hmm.
That looks very helpful. Jody, two questions from me
because I don't see anybody else who's got their hands up on
the first one of 'em is you talked about the, uh,
shifting control to Wellington, um, in terms of the, uh,
the governance board arrangements, which at the moment,
essentially it's 50 50.
Um, do you not think, I mean,
Auckland Council said they really like that
because there's a, there's a partnership in a sense,
it binds the crown into it as opposed
to the crown not being involved in it and
therefore not committed to it.
Especially, uh, we haven't yet got the numbers of
what government invests in transport in Auckland compared to
what Auckland Council invests.
They may well be fairly similar.
Um, crown may be more, uh, court council even more,
but isn't there an issue there?
If the council's happy and it is binding everybody together,
that's actually probably not a bad model.
I have two responses.
Um, Mr. Foster, first of all, um,
the funding levels of funding, it's only the scale
that's really different between Auckland
and the other parts of the country.
You still get that 50 50 model in Wellington
and Canterbury and Waikato.
Just before Jody, before you go on,
there's also the bit about state investment
and state highways, which is a hundred zero.
Yes. It's the balance of all those things
and things like CRLs and things like that.
So, so that's why I wanted
to get the particular focus on,
on Auckland. So anyway, carry on. Yeah,
Yeah. And so
again, yep. So you are right.
There is a scale issue,
but again, there is, there is that component.
The other component is there is already government buy-in,
um, under the underlying Transport Management Act at the
moment, NZTA gets to appoint a representative on each
of the regional transport boards.
Um, so there's no reason why there shouldn't be a
government representative.
We also think the government gets to have a lot of input
around the government policy statement on land transport,
and of course they've got the checkbook,
and so there's also that ability as well.
So we don't think that the argument that just
because Auckland is, you know, requires more funding
that Auckland should get suddenly more, you know,
That wasn't quite, that wasn't quite
more the binding in it wasn't.
Yeah. Anyway, the other question is, which we've had, um,
raised is the whole thing around A CCO for public transport
and what your thoughts are on the some per some Auckland
Council said, look, let us set it, decide to set it up
and what goes into it rather than dictating it.
Um, but also whether actually having a
CCO is a good idea or not.
The AA you might have heard just now basically said, no,
stick it all inside council.
Others said CCO is a good idea. Mixed views.
What, what's your thought there for running public transport
and the, the, um, you know, uh,
the facilities like bus stops and railways stops and so on.
Um, attached to it,
We don't want to see the council having complete
and utter control of transport in Auckland.
We do think that Auckland Transport plays a good role
as a public transport provider.
The last thing I want,
and you wanna seen in our submission, we do, like,
we do wanna see a transport de
depoliticized as much as possible.
I don't wanna see a situation where a counselor says, oh,
make sure that that particular bus never gets canceled
because I'm a marginal counselor
and I don't wanna lose votes
and I don't wanna get complaints from my constituents
because their bus got canceled a couple of times.
Uh, we do have seen that in Australia
before where, um, it is just sometimes referred to in,
in humor that transport policy is determined by
how marginal a seat is.
You make your point Very well, Jodie, thank you. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Thank you. Look, really appreciate that.
Thank you very much. And, um, thank you.
If you have any questions, let me know.
Will do. Thank you. Thanks. Okay.
Uh, that takes us to Auckland One Rail, right?
Which is by Zoom.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes. Thanks Lisa. Excellent, and thank you so lovely.
You can, you can take your submission as read, um,
if you wanna highlight some anything, go for it.
Okay. Uh, I'll tell you with four minutes to go, uh, so
that we at least get some time hopefully for questions.
But at your time is yours.
Excellent, thanks. So, I'm Lisa Dovera
and thanks for the opportunity to speak today.
I'm here representing Auckland One Rail, uh,
Auckland One Rail, uh,
operates Auckland's Metro Rail Services under
contract to Auckland Transport.
We're a joint venture with an Australian company, UGL
and a Singaporean company, CDG.
So we bring extensive international
experience to this venture.
Um, so for those of you who dunno,
we deliver more than a million passenger
journeys every month.
And we look to looking to increase
that significantly once CRL comes into service as well.
So we manage the train operations with the train crew.
We manage the maintenance now of the trains, the station
services and maintenance, as well as looking at safety
and security on the, on the rail network
network in Auckland.
So our mission, obviously is to, to deliver safe, reliable,
and frequent rail services, uh, to Auckland.
So our position on the bill is basically we acknowledge the
intent of the bill to strengthen democratic accountability
and to align the long-term transport strategy.
However, from an operational perspective, the bill is,
its drafted presents risks that could, um,
undermine the rail reliability
and the customer experience at a critical time for Auckland
and our transport with rail.
So I just thought I'd highlight three key areas, um,
or four, four areas really to talk about.
Firstly, um, unclear or overlapping responsibility.
So the proposed shift policy planning
and infrastructure roles to Auckland Transport
and the council, uh, from transport to the council,
that has a potential to raise some risk, particularly
around rail related infrastructure.
So for example, station interfaces, who's got priority over
what the, um, level crossings is a big one.
Obviously with the level crossing removal program
planned for Auckland.
Um, who is gonna have responsibility?
It's already relatively complex with Auckland Transport,
Kiwi Rail and, um, Auckland One Rail,
having skin in the game there.
Adding another flavor to that will add complexity,
the feeder networks, how the buses
and the rail infrastructure will work together.
And obviously capital improvements.
So if these responsibilities aren't really clear,
it will mean that we'll get slow decision making.
The costs are likely to rise
and accountability will weaken,
which I think will really undermine the rail infrastructure.
Um, and moving away,
moving maintenance away from the rail operator adds another
interface and, and introduces risk to our customers as well.
The other area obviously is the timing of, of the transition
and the disruption that'll have for Auckland.
The big thing for Rail obviously is CRL
and the six month transition period, uh,
will coincide likely with the opening of the city rail link.
This is a once in a generation moment for Auckland, um,
and the transport that we're gonna offer.
So any government governance uncertainty
around this period's really gonna impact the decision making
and lead to delay further delays to CRL, um, with approvals
and compromise the service continuity that we expect
to need over that period.
Next, of course, is funding Uncertainty Rail is, um,
it really requires multiyear investments.
So if we look at, um, any of the requirements
for rail maintenance and infrastructure,
it's on about 104 week, um, maintenance cycle.
So any changes outside of that is gonna be really, uh,
difficult to manage.
So under any new governance
and political timeframes that might shorten those, uh,
timeframes would be really detrimental for us.
We really want to ensure that we can continue to have, uh,
rail renewals and expansion in a with good
for planning and forethought.
So annual budget cycles won't really work for, um, ensuring
that we have the long lived asset requirements for rail.
And finally, as, um,
I think Jody talked about political interference
and technical decisions,
so obviously operational safety signal standards
and rolling stock compatibility must really remain
isolated from political cycles.
We really need technical experts making those decisions
and not, um, relying on short term optics,
which we could get if it was run under the council there.
So we don't want political pressure to try
and save funds, uh, from maintenance to the detriment
of the actual infrastructure being compromised.
We do see opportunities if the bills
implemented well, so that's great.
And a 30 year transport plan would certainly embed rail
upgrades provide us with the resilience we need
and ensure mode shift in auckland's long-term strategy
around rail as well.
We also see that the local boards can improve station
precinct integration, uh, with,
and that last mile con connectivity in particular
because they'll have a good understanding of
what our customers would like
and give us the power to, to embed that.
So we've come up with some recommendations.
Um, as you saw in the paper, really it's important
to have clear lines of delineation.
So understanding who's responsible
for rail infrastructure maintenance
and the technical standards.
And we think that really does need to stick
with rail expertise, ensuring
that we have continuity and stability.
So guaranteeing existing contracts
and providing realistic phase transition plans
that are based on risk mitigation,
ensuring funding certainty,
so making sure it's multi-year capital and, um, projects
and making sure we ring fence funding for rail
and ensuring that rail does maintain a priority in Auckland
as we try and grow, particularly
after the investment with City Rail Link, ensuring
that we have, um, pol real technical, uh,
independence from political decisions
and then ensuring we integrate the rail requirements into
the 30 year plan.
I think the big key thing for us, Lisa, we've
Got just have four minutes left.
Well, the, the big thing for us is really
around the timing and ensuring
that it de conflicts with City Rail Link.
It's gonna be imperative for us
to be focusing on City Rail Link
and we need the members of Auckland Transport
to be laser focused on that as well.
So anything that conflicts with, that's gonna be critical
for us as we try and move into, into that mode.
So I think that's, uh, probably most of the points
that I've highlighted from the paper,
but if there's any questions, I'll welcome them now.
Okay, thanks Lisa. Um, I dunno,
Gilda, Lisa, just a quick question, um,
about the governance risk
and that's helpful for the committee to understand.
Um, does it solve your problem if it's a longer timeframe?
Yes, I think if we can get past the past the city rolling
implementation, um, to, you know, a few months
after that, then I think that would certainly help.
Because at the moment we are making really critical
decisions as things are compressing in the project
and to, um, to have people worried about, um, any changes
to their structure or be really detrimental in getting
those decisions made.
And, and do you want the committee
to be thinking about the timeframe just for your, um,
the governance that applies to Auckland One Rail
or do you think that, um, your timing point applies
to the entire shift from Auckland County?
I think certainly with the public transport
and the infrastructure piece, that's gonna be critical,
but I, I dunno if you can separate them easily.
So it's probably about the whole shift to be fair.
Okay. And, um, how long, how long are your timeframes
for your commercial arrangements with, um,
what was Auckland Transport?
So we've got a seven year contract.
We're nearly three years into it now, so yeah.
With extension options,
Um, would this current arrangement have changed the
business case for your contractual arrangements
or do you see no change in
the commerciality of your arrangements?
I guess it really depends what it starts to look like.
If we're pulling infrastructure away,
then potentially there would be change for us.
But if it stays as a holistic rail infrastructure
and operations, then probably very minimal change for us.
Thanks. Cool. So from me, Lisa, just as we go through
that process of opening CRL,
and I know you'll never give us a date for it.
Um, no. Do you wanna, you could,
Sorry, You could spill the beans now.
Um, would, would it work to have to,
to essentially maintain, I think this is where AR was going,
but to effectively maintain the governance arrangements for,
um, uh, for at in respect of that only and, um,
and carry on with the rest of it.
'cause it means those, that governance arrangement then
focus solely on the finishing the delivery of, um, of CRL.
That would certainly help the project,
but, uh, again, I'll be unsure about
what the other implications might be
around level crossing change, you know, so
how far is it gonna go? I
Was gonna, I was gonna come to that. Yeah.
Yeah. So some, somebody has to be responsible
for those, um, level crossings at the moment.
Mm-hmm. Um, I'm presuming it's Kiwi rail.
Kiwi rail manage the track, and then you've got the NZ TA
and at around the roading pieces that come in.
It's very, very complex to be,
to be honest at the moment. Um, but that'll
Be true of every, that'll be true
of every railway person in the
Country.
Absolutely. Absolutely.
So, um, so having the three parties on board
and how we, we fund
and manage the current level crossings is certainly gonna be
an area we're gonna have to continue to focus on
because we still working on that rail, uh,
level crossing removal program
And just, and just, uh, in the future CCO arrangement,
which is proposed for public transport,
which would include at least the Auckland Metro Rail system,
it wouldn't include the, the tracks
'cause that all still be Kiwi rail.
Mm-hmm. But, um, does that that work for you?
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
So we would like to see it independent from the
council. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Thanks. Look, thank you Lisa.
I don't see any other questions, so that's brilliant.
Really appreciate it and keep thanks very much.
Keep the good work and you can let us know
when you're opening CRL
When we know. We'll let you
know.
Thank you, Lisa. Thank you. Bye. Cheers.
Right. Okay. Now we have a Patel in person. Welcome.
A and thank you for all the work you've put into all these,
um, submissions.
Uh, we've got you down for sadly as an individual,
only five minutes, but, um,
I'll give you a call with about two to go.
Um, and, um, again,
highlight those things you really wanna highlight.
I won't start until you are ready to start.
We got that sort out.
Do you need us to do that? No,
I'm just gonna, oh, James.
Okay. Right. Okay. In your hands. And starting
Now.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Ala Patel.
I am, uh, infrastructure Digital Asset Specialist
and, uh, curious Concern Lander.
I have made my submission constructively opposing the bill,
uh, with the support of evidence from Open Public Data
and firsthand industry experience.
My submission, which is based on evidence
and not opinion, shows
that 80 while not Perfect is functioning
as an efficient internationally com uh, compatible,
technically capable, and culturally grounded institution.
First Auckland's transport system is the economic backbone
of New Zealand supporting 38% of national GDP
projects like CRL
and Eastern Busway take decades from concept to delivery.
Shifting governance every three years creates uncertainty
that the OECD ones can add up to 20 to 40%
to the total project costs, mostly due
to rework and administration.
It also disrupts ongoing day-to-day operations
and long-term asset management.
Quality infrastructure needs stability, not restructuring.
Second, the AT model already aligns
with global best practice.
Like Vancouver's TransLink at already reports
to Auckland Council through its statement of intent,
annual reports and shared planning under the regional land
transport plan, ensuring full democratic oversight while
preserving the technical independence.
Members from Auckland Council
and Central Agency like NZTA are already part of this board.
In the last reporting year 80, met 18 out of 19 performance
targets achieved 94% service reliability, 88% punctuality
and delivered within budget.
That's not a broken system, it's a capable one.
Third, Maori values
and treaty obligations are not abstract concepts.
They are operational realities within it through ra Hi Papa
and the man UA Kaki Forum.
It partners directly with Maori
and Pacifica communities to deliver road safety
and cultural design outcomes.
Maori values like Kai Tanga, Ang Tanga
and Whakapapa require decisions to be made, made close to UA
and people, something that a temporary politicized
or centralized structure cannot replicate effectively,
especially in Auckland's GTO day operations,
something which is very consistent from even OECD
and World Bank's findings.
Fourth, it is strategic asset management.
Digital engineering
and sustainability leadership is globally recognized.
It's digital twin information management frameworks,
automated decarbonization planetary boundaries
and scope three emission pilots, uh, in, in, uh,
in Auckland's transport
and infrastructure context mirrors the recently published
infrastructure in New South Wales, digitalization policy
proving Auckland's readiness
for advanced data driven delivery.
These are the topics which are highly spoken of
by executive leaders of many multinational
global companies as well.
Fragments of this pilots has been later seen reflected in
NRTs published documents
and frameworks as well, showing already existing
eighties strong institutional independent capability
and initiative in Auckland's complex transport
infrastructure and urban environment.
Auckland's Eastern Busway alone will save 14,000 tons
of CO2 per which,
and it is zero emission bus roadmap aligns
with international climate frameworks as well.
These are not theoretical benefits.
They are measurable outcomes delivered
through professional stability and local stewardship.
The answer is not to dismantle, it is governance,
but to strengthen it through clearer detailed KPIs on cost
control, safety, and emissions.
But, uh, public transparency through detail board reports
and open data use of digital dashboards.
Regular independent performance reviews every five years,
and ringfenced funding to reduce cost over runs by up to 25%
and improve public accountability as per OECD
stability enable safety, sustainability,
and trust by retaining it is independent structure.
While improving oversight, Auckland can continue
to deliver world class culturally aligned
and digitally advanced transport outcomes.
Auckland's transport deserves governance that is stable,
transparent, and technically capable
just like the city serves.
I respectfully urge the committee to strengthen not weak.
It is governance. Thank you. Thank
You. We've thank we've got 30
odd seconds left.
Any questions, colleagues?
Good submission. Thank You.
Can I just ask one thing very, very quickly, which is, uh,
you said that, um, the best the best models, uh, have, uh,
in your quote was around, um, uh, sort responsive, um,
governance arrangements and independence and delivery.
But at the moment, the problem with,
at you're quite clearly is it's not responsive
to the political governance.
And that's, that's why we, we are comment, sorry,
I I didn't get your question.
Can you please repeat that again? Uh,
Look, I, uh, it was, you said that the,
the best global best practice retain independent transport
agencies while in, while, um,
ensuring political accountability to strategic level.
At the moment, the IT model everybody says
fails the latter part of that.
So, uh, if you're talking about public frustration,
when we say that IT model is failing, then
that public frustration can be a reflection
of transition phase.
Uh, the facts and evidence,
which we can see from the open data, like, uh,
the annual reports of Aland transport, the, uh, statement
of intent, uh, all those gives, uh, numbers
and facts specifically, uh, which shows
that Auckland Transport is performing quite efficiently, uh,
whether it's in terms of safety, sustainability, uh,
asset management as well. Yeah,
It wasn't efficiently. But anyway,
I'll leave it there. Right. Thank you.
A and thank you for all the work you
put into all of that. Yeah, thank
You. And I'll be happy
to provide any more answers
or any more facts or evidences if there are
any questions coming up. Thank you.
Appreciate, We appreciate it.
Uh, if I didn't answer properly
to your particular questions, then that's
Fine. That's fine. It's fine. You did well.
That's fine. Thank you.
Yeah, thank you. Thanks.
Okay, now we've got Brian person,
Brian Ferguson in person, and via Zoom.
I don't know how you do both of those. So if you could,
if you, if you could demonstrate this
one we'll be, we'll be,
Yeah, well, um, the Zoom context coming in from Sydney,
that's China Rail
or, um, Nadia, uh, I'm here.
I don't know if she's got the link
Or so.
Right. Okay, good. We'll, we'll get you, we'll get Nadia on.
Thank you As well.
Right. We've got you down for sadly only five minutes.
Um, yeah, I see that. But I'll give you a call.
I'll give you a call with two to go. Thank you.
So again, if you can take it as read, um,
and highlight what you wanna highlight.
All right. My name is Brian Ferguson.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak in support
of the local government in Auckland Council
Transport Governance Amendment.
Bill, join.
Joining me today is NAIA of China Rail, uh,
in advisory capacities.
Dr. Grant Guilford, previously speaking,
Grant, good to see you, Tony
Of science and the University of Auckland
and Vice Chancellor here in Wellington.
Um, let's start with why the bill is, uh,
mattered now Auckland's at a crossroad.
Our city growth, climate commitment,
and public expectation demands a transport system
that is innovative, accountable, accountable
and effective in the current governance model has failed
to deliver on these fronts.
The bill is an opportunity to change that
as Auckland resident
with an interest in sustainable transport.
I believe the bill is a timely
and necessary step
to modernize our city's transport governance
and unlock the innovative solutions, uh, especially
as Auckland Groves and Faces.
New challenge. I will take my submission as read.
Yes, please. Okay. First, uh, financial accountability.
We support the build financial accountability
and cost effective transport.
Secondly, strategic planning and government alignment.
Thirdly, road control, authority
and infrastructure delivered fourthly,
democratic accountability, uh, local input, fifthly,
delivering focused, uh, operations.
And in terms of my, uh, recommendation,
I urge the committee, uh, to consider two improvements.
Um, you have the reviews of 30 years.
I would like within
that review every five years, not 10 years.
Uh, this is because changes in technology
and transport, ensuring the transport relates, uh,
contracts are period, logically reviewed, cost effective,
and transparent.
In summary, this bill provides the governance, clearance,
financial discipline
and strategy aligning needs for a modern,
sustainable transport system in Auckland.
It is balanced long-term planning with local responsibility,
uh, responsive and, uh, positions our city
to adopt innovative, uh, solutions, reducing costs,
and improving our outcome for rate payers and environment.
I thank you for your opportunity and questions.
That was very quick in Efficien. Right. So good.
Thank you. Questions. Okay.
Um, question about the, the, uh,
so you've got the statutory reviews,
but you want to have some, um, reviews in between.
Are you talking about shortening the review period
or you talking about having from
Yeah. No, I,
I just think 10 years is too long.
Uh, technology's moving too quickly, especially around AI
and reducing submission, uh, emissions.
Um, I think it should be five years.
Uh, 10 years is too long.
You know, the whole world can change in that time. You
Talking about that, that bringing the period short
and not necessarily meeting like a briefer
No, no. The 30 year
plan's brilliant, but Oh yeah.
Have it reviewed every five years, not 10 years.
Okay. Hello. Hi.
What's Trans Limited?
Oh, that's my company. Um, it specializes in, uh,
consulting to transport issues.
I have a partnership with Trackers, uh, with
CRC, which is China Rail.
And we have some technology we'd like to bring
to New Zealand, but unfortunately we've been blocked by at,
Um, you, you've said, you said Brian in your, um,
submission under strategic planning
by aligning central government
and Auckland Council priorities
through the third 30 year
transport plan, et cetera, et cetera.
Coherent, strategic, um, environment.
We've had a number of, um, people submitting, saying
that they think that there's too much government involvement
and not enough council involvement.
No, it's Good. Can you just go, I mean, I see it
as being tying the two together.
Sorry. Yeah, I see, I see it
as tying the two together in a way
that if it was minority government probably
wouldn't, but your view,
Oh, you're in a partnership.
This is great, this is a one time chance. Get it right.
And I, I support the bull strongly. This is brilliant work.
I read all the documents behind, I can see all the work
that the Ministry of Transport tender.
Uh, this is, uh, Ian at his best.
You know, he had absolutely nailed it.
Um, we met with them before they were voted in
and Mr. Bishop, um, they were all
electrical, uh, buses.
There's other technologies out there that have been must.
Alright. And Auckland transport's blocking them into story.
Yeah, No, okay. It was the structure.
I was, I was focused. Sorry. It was the structure. I was Oh,
It's brilliant. Good.
Well done. Congratulations.
Thank you. We thank you. There we go. We'll bang on.
Thank you. Really appreciate time. Good
Submission get done. Thank you very much.
Okay, we now have Graham East by Zoom.
James saw that.
Oh yeah.
Tell us what we need to do If anything.
It's too much today. It was really bad.
What a good idea. What a good idea, right?
There's one He's doing that. Yeah. Oh,
there he is, Graham.
Thank you. We've got your
submission, which you can take us red.
We've got you down for five minutes.
Um, you are on mute at the moment.
Uh, so I will, uh, I'll give you a call
with about two minutes to go, uh,
because we do like to ask questions, but in your hands.
You're on mute still.
Oh, you're on Graham, you're on mute still,
Right?
Well done. Can you hear me?
Yes. Okay. Five
Minutes starts now. I'll give you a
call with two to go.
Okay. You will have seen in my submission
that I'm deeply critical of many parts of the bill,
which I think are thoroughly misconceived.
One of the issues is about getting government
and council on the same page.
And the last speaker was Jolly Hockey sticks.
All in favor of that.
But this is to ignore the Atap, which has existed
for 10 years,
or not quite 10, nine years since 2016,
which is over and above
council developing its own transport policy.
Then they talk with the government.
But under this scheme, council goes into a meeting
with an equal number of government representatives with
supposedly a blank piece of paper,
although I don't think it'll be quite that.
Um, and then they have an equal say in developing the po.
So we're not getting a strategy for Auckland
and then talking with the government
about how to deliver it.
Government is in their boots and all from an early stage.
So to be specific, the Minister of Transport gets
to set the GPS, the government policy statement
that applies nationally,
but that has to be taken into account in developing
this 30 year plan.
He appoints half of the committee that's going to draw up
or oversee the drawing up of the plan
before they start work.
The RTC must seek direction,
those are the exact words in the bill from the minister.
And then when they've finished the MOT must submit the
plan to the minister for approval.
So that's at least four ways in which the minister gets
to screw this, the scrum.
And I suspect we're going to get a plan,
which is not really what Auckland needs for some years.
Now, the, the IT leadership, so
that's both the chief executive
and the chairman of the board have told council that
building our way out of congestion
is not a terribly fruitful enterprise.
That what we need to do is to find alternative ways
for people to get around.
And that can include even
what they call travel demand Management is trying
to avoid a lot of travel in the first place.
If the city is well designed, people should be able
to find places to work, places to be educated, places
to shop, and places to, to, um,
earn an income within kui of
where they live rather than having
Graham, we've got two, two minutes left.
Okay. Rather than having to travel clean across town,
that is, that's what's creating the congestion.
It's not a shortage of road space.
It's an excess of people traveling at peak times.
So, um, as I said in devising the whole scheme,
the word alignment does not
appear anywhere in the bill.
Clearly, they did not even know about it
or take it into account.
In devising the scheme, there is already a alignment
or integration in the mayor's words between, uh, Auckland
transport planning, whether it's at or council
and the government that exists.
So I am greatly concerned that we're going to wind up
with a plan which is gonna constrain council.
The wording of the mayor is now we're gonna be free,
we're gonna be in charge.
But if you are constrained by whatever's in this
grand new scheme, the the 30 year plan,
then we're gonna wind up delivering the wrong things.
So I know it's a full on hope,
but I would like to see the bill substantially redesigned
to take some of these things into account. Thank you,
Graham. Thank you. We've got about
30 seconds left.
Does anybody want to ask any questions?
Doesn't look like it. Look, you'd be very, very clear.
Um, Graham's a few things which we, uh, have to have a bit
of a think about, but, um, really appreciate your time
and all the effort you put into that.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Thank
You. Thanks Graham.
Thank you, Graham.
Okay, now we've got David Bolton, uh, in person.
I think it doesn't have, it doesn't say Zoom
Online.
Last submitter. Okay. Yeah.
Not online, not submit it looks like, yeah,
that's my show, so,
Right. Okay.
So have a David Bolt in here. No, so is David.
David's not online either. No.
It, so it looks like we, so we, we have no others? No. No.
Okay, cool. So I think we've got sort of about four
or five you're still trying to reach out to, to try
and arrange for next week if we can.
Otherwise, um, so that's, they would drop off.